TURKUVAZ
KITAP

A Fairer World is Possible
A Proposed Model for a United Nations Reform

Recep Tayyip Erdogan
Research
First Printing: Eyliil, 2021

Editor in Chief: Giilenay Borekci
Publishing Coordinator: Erdem Oztop
Translation: Dogan Eskinat

Jacket and Text Design: Giilay Tung

ISBN: 978-625-7548-19-9
Certificate No: 46403

Printing

Turkuvaz Haberlesme ve Yayincilik A.S.
Giizeltepe Mah. Maregal Fevzi Gakmak Cad.
B Blok No: 29/1/1-Eyiipsultan/Ise.
T:+90 212 354 30 00

All rights reserved. Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work

should be sent to Turkuvaz Haberlesme ve Yayincilik A.S.
Copyright © Turkuvaz Haberlesme ve Yayincilik A.S.

Pera
Ssh

RE

RAVORLD
SS BAGE

A Froposed Model for
a United Nations Reform

RECEP

TAYYIP

ERDOGAN

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

httos://archive.org/details/ison_9786257548199

Justice is among the most desperately needed things around
the world today. Unfortunately, institutions, who carry the
responsibility of promoting global justice, find themselves in
a state of idleness. At a time devoid of compassion, we are left
with no choice but to advocate justice and to be the voice of
humanity’s conscience.
This work, which was authored independently, provides
a detailed account of Turkey’s pursuit of justice on behalf of
all mankind. It highlights the injustice, discrimination and
double standards in the world in reference to the case of the
United Nations. Particularly, it stresses the need for comprehensive reforms regarding the Security Council, which effec-

tively serves the interests of five nations that exercise veto
powers. It touches on the dilemmas of global politics vis-a-vis
global injustice, the refugee crisis, international terrorism and
Islamophobia. It also discusses the UN’s problems with legitimacy, functionality, effectiveness, inclusiveness, representa-

tion and governance. Moreover, this book posits that a fairer
world is possible, presenting a principled, comprehensive,
strategic and applicable proposal for reforming the United
Nations, where there will be justice in representation and no
veto powers.

The UN was established after World War II to safeguard global peace. By now, however, it has fallen short of living up to humanity’s expectations for peace and welfare. The organization

has evolved into an institution that looks out for the interests of
powerful nations instead of the entire world. The UN watched

from the sidelines as oppression unfolded in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Syria. International law was
never used to hold Israel accountable for its oppressive practices. There would not have been so much injustice and de-

struction in the world had the Security Council been a platform
where all of the world enjoyed adequate representation.

Another pressing problem that the world faces relates to
the hypocritical and insincere treatment of terrorist organiza-

tions, which place at risk individual nations as well as global stability. As long as this twisted approach persists, which
amounts to relying on terrorist groups despite the immense
pain they cause, there is no doubt that we will never get re-

sults in the global fight against terrorist entities - nor solve
any problem that mankind currently faces.
The rise of Islamophobia — or, to use a clearer term, hos-

tility toward Muslims — in the West, too, reveals that the necessary lessons have not been learned from the past suffering
of Muslims, including massacres. The fact that Islamophobic
practices are endorsed by the authorities of certain countries,
which attempt to legitimize them through acts of legislation,

highlights the gravity of the threat that we face. The United
Nations must take the necessary steps and precautions re-

garding this vital issue for the sake of world peace and humanity’s peace of mind. Yet, it seems impossible to implement such measures due to the organization’s current, deeply
flawed structure. We cannot address contemporary problems

with the help of institutions that were shaped by past needs.
Indeed, it is no secret that such institutions even create new

problems themselves.
Under the rules governing the Security Council, three-quar-

ters of the global population suffers from a total lack of influence and power. The fate of eight billion people cannot be left
to the mercy, ambitions, interests and caprices of five nations
with zero accountability. The current state of affairs, there-

fore, is neither fair nor sustainable.
We maintain that justice alone can bring order, salvation and
joy to the world. To build a fairer world, we need a global order
that inspires hope and provides assurances. Our position is that
the United Nations, as a platform, could represent an important
opportunity, despite its shortcomings, provided that the necessary reforms are implemented. Turkey takes every opportuni-

ty to reiterate that the UN, starting with the Security Council,
must undergo comprehensive reforms. We will keep making
the same point until a new system, under which right will be

the source of might, is in place: The world is bigger than five.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, 2021

et ae

bent

od

ui’ =

:
aa

ie

aiid

we

deel

-

‘

hie a

‘ me

Ve

| eae i

hemat
| lode sie
iu)

i

=

ay

r

oe sl
i

é

>

; bape esty(<i: oigaiaadeaie

i

fap

WHS ot i tee agit
alata Palsl

SRR
Get al hae mona Vietele seprdleyicr mall
Wh iho
Thee eaindaagy “anob ye tac oti,
4
ie

*

ME

OES

tae.

Ly "pebie ro

CH i

Sin Tei

ee.

ae .

mlecaren
aay a

lh etl ae min Lag sila tned ead ae

ees aha

‘a

WM

CHT

RRNA

ae 2i

CEOTN
ais Nb

PSOPLES
WWCORD
CER

Macrae hoe

OWE DON

pe oe

cee cee

13

ce eae

ee 23

PART |
Double Standards in International Politics

and the Need for
a UN Reform .0..00...0.000000..ccccccccccecceeseeee: 37

THE DILEMMAS OF GLOBAL POLITICS ......cscssccsesesssssssssseetseesssssssvens 48
THE UN’S PROBLEM OF LEGITIMACY .....-ccsssscssssssssssssssesesessssssssveees 61
THE PROBLEM OF GLOBAL JUSTICE ....cccsccssssescsssssseecsssssseesesssseeeees 65
PRE IREGEE ISIS yi

ac tee

tel bod og ois Aap

75

THE PROBLEM OF INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM ........sscsssccsseeee000 83
[SLM
OR MOD Ny aie ta aiden dh aia srnanitie a atnuan cad 93
THE UN'S PROBLEM OF FUNCTIONALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS

102

THE QUESTION OF INCLUSIVENESS AND REPRESENTATION ... 116
THE QUESTION OF GLOBAL GOVERNANCE .......cccccscsseceseseseseeesees ileal

PART

II

A United Nations Reform...

MHEINEEDPORVAIREFORM

cecccceceees 129

's..ci.s.4:.5-s00oon eosccneeveeteoee ence 140

PRINCIPLES FOR A UNITED NATIONS REFORM

o.u..ccccsceseeseeeeeee 147

PROBLEMS WITH EXISTING REFORM PROPOSALS ........c.ccc0000e- Wey?
A PRINCIPLED, COMPREHENSIVE AND STRATEGIC PROPOSAL

175

JUSTICE IINIREPRESENTATION. 2. csesct. csssecteeesereecseaecssvesevocatencs 179

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
AND THE SECURIT ACOUNG! lenceat: teers eee scene eee ee 184
ABOLISHING THE VETOIPOWER je: = anuteec-e
tee e eee
ee 189
ANIAPEUICABLEIPROROSAL o wcrsnccn tetramer

teeter

194

A FAIRER WORLD

IS

POSSTBEE
A Proposed Model for a United Nations Reform

Foreword

That the 75th session of the United Nations General Assembly
took place in the shadow of the global Coronavirus pandemic represented an important and historic turning point to rethink the organization’s global purpose. In this regard, it was

highly significant that the United Nations met in September
2020 to discuss “The Fight Against COVID-19 and Multilateralism.” At that meeting, Turkey reiterated its earlier commitments and highlighted its determination to support the global

fight against the Coronavirus.
The international community is going through a difficult
time. Prior to the pandemic, there were many major issues,

with which the international community, as well as individ13

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

ual states, found difficult to cope. For many years, there had
been a state of uncertainty on a global scale. It is no secret that
there has been a failure to deal with the deteriorating global security situation, economic instability and global human
development. The global Coronavirus pandemic gave rise to
a much more comprehensive challenge than the uncertainty

fueled by pre-existing problems. In this regard, the pandemic struck the world at a time when it was already difficult
to cope with various challenges. Consequently, the long-debated ideas and practices of globalization, the rules-based international order and multilateralism came to be scrutinized

more and more fiercely due to the pandemic.
During this period, we have seen that globalization is not

a limitless process or phenomenon. We have also witnessed
that international rules, which had been growing ineffective,

came to be violated at a higher rate during the pandemic.

Moreover, we have seen that individual nations’ interests tri-

umphed over international mechanisms quite quickly. Our
problems are not limited to those developments. This is a time
when the global public good is being forgotten as humanity’s
universal values are reduced to a single civilization or culture. We must take a look at that picture and reflect on the full

and empty halves of the glass accurately and sincerely.
The empty half of the glass contains the various problems
that all multilateral and international organizations, starting
with the United Nations, experience. There are very compre-

hensive challenges, which must be taken seriously, in every
14

FOREWORD

part of the global governance mechanisms.

Global govern-

ance encounters problems with an unprecedented level of
complexity regarding all critical issues, including politics,
the economy, security and climate change, that are relevant

to the fate of all states and societies. Especially in the area
of public health, we have grasped, yet again, the ineffectiveness of existing global mechanisms and regulations in deal-

ing with multidimensional problems — some of which have
been caused by the Coronavirus pandemic. Indeed, it took
weeks, even months, for the Security Council, the UN’s top
decision-making body, to make room for the pandemic in its
agenda. In the early stages of the pandemic, all countries appeared to have been left to their own devices and abandoned

to their fate.
The problem of global governance

is not limited to the

UN’s ineffectiveness either. Many other international organizations, which are at the forefront to tackle global problems,
also failed to engage in effective governance during the Coronavirus pandemic

and proved unable to contain the crisis

through emergency measures.

The World Health Organiza-

tion, too, could not act fast enough to warn the international
community about the pandemic.
At a time when the world faces major problems, we can-

not afford to leave humanity’s fate to the mercy of a handful
of nations. To prevent the loss of reputation of international
organizations, we must review our mentality, institutions and

rules. We are compelled to create a new mental framework,

G &

At a time when the world faces
major problems, we can not afford
to leave humanity’s fate to the
mercy of a handful of nations.

FOREWORD

with justice at its center, without losing touch with the current realities of the global system. Subsequently, we must
concentrate on a process to restructure our thinking and institutions, and create a realistic road map.

That new mental framework ought to rest on the idea of
multilateralism, which can engage pressing problems in due
time and develop truly inclusive and effective solutions. What
we need to make the international order function better is to
restructure existing international institutions with an eye on
multilateralism. Effective multilateralism cannot be possible
in the absence of multilateral institutions that are capable of

inclusion. In this regard, we must start by restructuring the
Security Council and rapidly implement comprehensive and
meaningful reforms. As such, we must make the structure
and functioning of the Security Council more effective, more
democratic, more transparent and more accountable.
Likewise, we need to empower the UN General Assem-

bly, which embodies the international community’s common
conscience. The aforementioned steps could represent a revolutionary leap toward effective multilateralism. It may be
too late unless we make room for pressing problems on our
agenda, for a more realistic and serious discussion, without

further delay.
The full half of the glass is filled with the UN’s potential
to create major opportunities for humanity’s pursuit of peace,

justice and welfare. Keeping in mind that we have yet to fully
recover from the crisis that the COVID-19 pandemic generat17

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

ed, we must strive to effectively use existing institutions and
mechanisms for multilateral cooperation. Local solutions will
only save the day if our problems are global. We must high-

light, every single time, that international solidarity is needed
to find long-term solutions and be guided by that principle in
the face of all global crises. To accomplish global peace, stability and security, we must create a road map for sustainable
restructuring around global justice.

The United Nations happens to be one of the most effective
platforms for bringing to life this new kind of multilateralism.
However, we face extremely critical issues. The UN must con-

centrate on those issues, as a priority, restore its fading effectiveness and authority, and take bolder steps toward comprehensive restructuring.

It is not possible to contain problems locally or to ignore
them altogether. The Syrian crisis can be viewed as a striking

example in this regard. The dispute in Syria, which entered
its tenth year, continues to pose a threat to our region’s secu-

rity and stability. We are faced with a crisis, which resulted in
hundreds of thousands of civilian casualties, forced millions
to flee Syria, and wreaked havoc on that country’s infrastructure and economy. Syria, where terrorism rears its ugly head,
could only be considered a tragedy in humanity’s modern history. Turkey, which dealt the first and heaviest blow to the
terrorist organization Daesh, continues its fight against another terrorist entity, the PKK-YPG, to prevent terrorists from

taking over Syria. The international community cannot find

18

FOREWORD

a lasting solution to the Syrian question in the absence of a
principled stance and a firm determination against all terrorist organizations. That approach is also a precondition of facilitating the safe and voluntary return of asylum seekers to
Syria. Otherwise, there will be a problem in the Middle East
that cannot be addressed for a long time.
Turkey has been hosting some four million Syrian asylum
seekers within its border and meeting their every need. We
continue to assist an equal number of Syrians in areas, where

we exert control, starting with places near our southern border. All those activities are carried out without significant

support from the international community or international
organizations, with our own resources and the support of our
citizens.

It must be everyone’s priority to resolve the Syrian dispute

based on the road map outlined in the UN Security Council’s Resolution 2254. For this purpose, the political process,
which was launched under the UN’s auspices and came to

be endorsed and guided by the Syrian people, must be completed successfully. That is the only way for Syria to reach a
lasting peace with its territorial integrity and political unity
intact. We are committed to defending Syria’s political unity
and territorial integrity until that mission is accomplished.
Countries like Turkey, which is home to more asylum seekers than any other nation, have protected humanity’s honor

through their sacrifice. In contrast, certain nations, including
some European states, have been violating the rights of asy19

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

lum seekers and migrants. It is time for the United Nations

to adopt a strong position regarding those violations, which
erode the Geneva Convention and the international human
rights system.

Climate change is another pressing issue, alongside other
unsolved problems, that we are obliged to address together.
We see the heavy toll of humanity’s meddling with nature’s

balance. Climate change must be among our top priorities at
a time when conflicts, power struggles and trade wars tend to
steal the spotlight. For the sake of future generations, it is necessary for the international community to adopt a common
position and to treat that issue as the most important question

of global governance.
The current approach to global government faces a multitude of problems; hence the need for the UN to reflect on its
position as an active player and to launch a process to restore
its authority. We have no choice but to stop and reverse this
turn for the worse. Although Turkey bears almost no histori-

cal responsibility in this regard, we support this fight sincerely and live up to our responsibilities. In the recent past, we
hosted the Conference of Parties of UN Convention to Combat
Desertification. We have promoted fruitful cooperation with

many regions, starting with Africa, and numerous countries.
We will also host the 16" Conference of Parties of the UN
Convention on Biological Diversity in 2022.
I want to take this opportunity to bring to your attention a

problem that threatens humanity but has been largely invisi20

FOREWORD

ble. Racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia and hate speech have
reached alarming levels. During the pandemic, xenophobia
and racism have spread further, resulting in acts of violence
against defenseless people, including immigrants and asylum seekers. Muslims are affected more than other groups by

these dangerous trends, which feed off prejudice and ignorance. Politicians, who resort to populism to impress voters,

and marginal groups, which abuse freedom of expression to
legitimize hate speech, are chiefly responsible for this dangerous development. Turkey hereby called on all international
organizations to urgently take more concrete steps in the fight
against this mentality.
Once again, we call on the United Nations to recognize
March 15, the anniversary of the terrorist attack against Muslims in New Zealand, as the Day of International Solidarity
Against Islamophobia. The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, which is the world’s second-largest international organization after the UN, has already officially recognized the day.
The pandemic and the resulting economic crisis continue
to negatively impact sustainable development and the 2030

agenda. Developing nations and countries with the lowest
level of income have been disproportionately affected by the
crisis. In truth, what happened during the pandemic established that sustainable development goals could be an im-

portant guide for tackling all types of global crises. We must
tap into the transformative power of digitalization, too, as we
create financial recipes for a way out of the current crisis. We
21

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

must not, however, allow certain groups to dominate digitalization. We must focus on justice in regard to digitalization,

just as we advocate justice in global politics.
Although we must certainly maintain our distance amid
the pandemic,

we are compelled to work more

and more

closely when it comes to the joint fight against all challenges.

We must view the pandemic as an opportunity and take
the necessary steps to establish global justice.

22

Introduction

As President, I have strived to keep my promises to the Turk-

ish people from the start. Our commitment to an approach to
foreign policy based on peace, justice and values went beyond
mere words. In many places — from Syria and Palestine to Iraq
and Somalia, from Libya and Myanmar to the Balkans and Central Asia — it became reality. Indeed, Turkey became the world’s

largest provider of humanitarian aid, compared to its gross national product, as a result of our efforts. At a time when the
world’s most developed nations shut their doors on oppressed
people, running from war, starvation and terrorism, Turkey
welcomed millions of asylum seekers from Syria and Iraq, regardless of their ethnicity, language or religious affiliation.

23

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

All those developments took place at a time when major

ruptures occurred in the international system, and political,
economic and socio-cultural fault lines widened across the
world. As people still feel the impact of the global economic
crisis, which has been around since 2008, poverty and income
equality, together with competition over energy resources,
continue to escalate every passing day.
The global economic contraction, which was caused by the
Coronavirus pandemic, continues to shake the foundations of
the world’s largest economies as well. On the economic front,
we have witnessed a transition from competition to a new

period, characterized by trade wars. The current administrations in many countries, in the Middle East and elsewhere,

adopted policies of intimidation and violence toward their
own citizens, causing serious destruction and social unrest.

That trend continues today. At the same time, such policies
of repression and alienation create a fertile ground for terrorist organizations. Indeed, terrorist organizations like Daesh
and al-Qaida became globalized, exerted influence over large

parts of the world and came to threaten all humanity. Furthermore, a new wave of racist and Islamophobic terrorism,
which targets Muslims in their places of worship, has been on
the rise anywhere from Europe to New Zealand.
As terrorism became more prominent globally, Turkey was
compelled to deal with the negative side effects of regional
instability and encountered threats from various terrorist entities.

24

INTRODUCTION

The weakening and collapse of the Syrian state as a result

of the civil war gave rise to fresh threats, such as Daesh and
the YPG, on top of the separatist terrorist organization that we
had been fighting for three decades. At this time, Syria and the
developments in Syria represent the single greatest source of
terror threats in our country. Since 2011, hundreds of thousands of innocent people have been massacred by a regime that

engaged in state terrorism against its own citizens with ballistic
missiles, chemical weapons and barrel bombs. More than 13

million people were forced to flee their homes and lands in an
attempt to escape oppression and violence. In Iraq, too, similar
migration waves emerged due to prolonged instability and vi-

olent clashes. Likewise, thousands of people are running away
from Afghanistan. The same goes for Africa, where hundreds
of thousands of people leave their homes and become refugees
due to armed conflict and the resulting instability.
The Palestinian

question,

which

has been a bleeding

wound in the heart of the international community for a half

century, in turn, remains the primary source of tensions and
crises in the region. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of

people, who took to the streets in 2011 to demand democracy,
justice and bread, have not accomplished their goals over the
past decade. If anything, they ended up being subjected to
more oppression, suffering and injustice.
The current situation, where the blood of dozens of innocent people is spilled every day, hurts our country deeply.
Yet the international community and its organizations limit
25

& é

Although the organization defines
itself as a global organization
promoting justice, security,
economic development and
social equality in all countries,
it proves unable to live up to
that commitment.

INTRODUCTION

themselves to watching it all from the sidelines. To make matters worse, the international community and global players

actively oppose democracy and the popular demand for justice. They legitimize those who ruthlessly massacre innocent

people all around the world and disregard violence while ignoring universal values in the name of Realpolitik.
Nowadays,

regional and international organizations can-

not properly function due to the various problems that global
governance encounters. Those values, which are claimed to
be universal, cannot guide humanity’s attempts to address, in
particular, regional crises. International organizations, which
represent the main pillars of global governance, cannot take
the initiative and bring nations together to solve pressing problems. The United Nations, which is supposed to be the primary
source of solutions, unfortunately, cannot play an active role.
The organization, whose self-stated goal is to promote global

peace, is increasingly reduced to a body, devoid of function,
whose

authority may be disregarded and whose influence

fades every passing day. To make matters worse, the UN’s legitimacy continues to face increasing scrutiny. Although the

organization defines itself as a global organization promoting
justice, security, economic development and social equality in

all countries, it proves unable to live up to that commitment.

Today, the United Nations, and especially the Security
Council, faces the danger of becoming dysfunctional and discredited due to their helplessness in the face of violent conflicts in various parts of the world, starting with Syria and
27

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

Iraq, as well as forced migration and the oppression of innocent people.

In truth, the current level of disinterest is not unprecedented. The organization’s lack of attention to massacres during
the Bosnian War of the 1990s and its inability to prevent the
massacre in Rwanda went down in the history of the United

Nations as shameful moments. It is possible to identify more
such instances today.

The developments, which are rooted in problems in Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Ukraine and elsewhere, indicate that the
current international system cannot deliver justice or devel-

op solutions. We are faced with an international system that
cannot defend victims against aggressors and effectively turns
a blind eye to human rights violations by the great powers.
Many countries around the world share this same view.
Turkey maintains that the UN system must not be preserved
in its current state and instead be updated in line with contemporary circumstances. For this purpose, we do everything

in our power to put in place a more effective, transparent,
functional, representative and accountable mechanism with
the potential to contribute to global peace and stability. In

particular, we demand that the UN Security Council, which
has the power to take action, be restructured and that comprehensive change takes place to ensure that the Council attains
justice in representation.

Just as the League of Nations, which was formed after
World War I, failed to live up to its responsibilities and stood
28

INTRODUCTION

idly by in the lead-up to World War II, so, too, could the pres-

ervation of the Security Council’s current state lead to fresh
suffering and great destruction. The Council can’t perform its

tasks without the implementation of necessary reforms to restructure it and its rebuilding according to the needs of the
present. After all, the Council, in its current state, serves the
interests of its five permanent members - rather than global
peace and justice.
That structure, which turns a blind eye to the new global
balance of power, the equilibrium between continents, changes in the balance of the global economy and the demands of
rising powers, cannot carry forward the current global system. At a time when violence is unfolding in many places,
the Council cannot adopt any resolution if even one of the

permanent members objects. That state of affairs indefinitely
postpones the resolution of crises and causes more humanitarian tragedies.
From a continental perspective, the Council’s permanent
members

come

from Asia, Europe and North America.

In

religious terms, they are predominantly Christian. In other
words, major religious communities, such as Muslims, and
others are notably absent from the Council. The Organisation

of Islamic Cooperation, which has 57 members and speaks for
one-third of the global population, has no influence over, or
seat in, this crucial body. In terms of background, the world’s
leading nations, such as Arabs, Turks, Indians, Indonesians

and Africans, have no representation at the Security Council.
29

é G

To make global peace fairer and
more sustainable, we need the
UN to reflect multiculturalism
and multipolarism.

INTRODUCTION

Indeed, the nonpermanent members, who are elected for two
years, have no real say in the Council’s decisions.
There is no doubt that we need all members of the interna-

tional community, not just the Security Council’s members,
to be heard to contribute more to global peace and security.
To make global peace fairer and more sustainable, we need
the UN to reflect multiculturalism and multipolarism. The
world is neither unipolar nor bipolar. Nor is it under the
cultural hegemony of a dominant culture or a small number
of privileged stakeholders. It is possible to make the world
multipolar, multicentric, multicultural, more inclusive and
fairer. The UN is the primary place to accomplish that goal.

The UN reform is the path to peace, stability, justice and effective global governance.
Reforming the United Nations and, especially, restructuring the Security Council obviously require a global consen-

sus. Turkey has advocated a proposal to that effect for a long
time and opened it up for discussion. Our proposed solution
manifests itself in our motto: “The world is bigger than five.”
It calls for the implementation of a plan to restructure the
Security Council. Updating the Council to represent all continents, faiths, backgrounds and cultures as fairly as possible

would be a revolutionary step toward finding solutions and
upholding global peace.
In this regard, we propose that the number of the Security
Council’s permanent members be increased from five to 20.

We posit that the General Assembly must have broader pow31

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

ers, whereas the Security Council no longer makes decisions
unilaterally and answers to the General Assembly — so that
there can be balance. An alternative solution is that the Council’s 20 members be selected by the General Assembly. As
such, it would be possible for all countries around the world
to join this important decision-making body. To ensure that
a reform and restructuring proposal will succeed, it is crucial
to challenge the current approach to permanent membership
and to abolish the veto powers of permanent members — one
of the main reasons behind the current deadlock. We will
have made great progress toward restructuring by preventing
member states from bringing the whole system to a standstill.

We are fully aware that certain nations, which prefer the status quo, are unsettled by Turkey’s vocal criticism of global problems and calls for the UN’s restructuring. Indeed, the relevant
countries do not want the balance of power, which emerged out
of World War I and reached its current state after World War
II, to change. Over the 76 years that passed since World War
II, there were major changes in human and social life, as well

as the balance of power. Yet those players wish to preserve an
old and outdated mechanism for the sake of their own interests.
Indeed, the current system, which ignores contemporary realities and fears change, is at the heart of many disputes, conflicts,

competitions and oppressive practices today.

We are also aware of the realities of world politics. As
such, we do not expect century-old problems to go away over-

night. We understand, too, that reforming the United Nations
32

INTRODUCTION

is not enough to promote global peace and to ensure that all

of humanity lives in peace. It is impossible, however, for the
UN, which is supposed to safeguard global peace and be the
voice of the global community’s conscience, to side with the

status quo against change. In the absence of a revolutionary
leap toward change, the present and the future stand to face

great risk.

7

Let us not forget that the legitimacy of an international system, which fails to prevent global injustices, political disputes

and social or economic crises, shall inevitably be opened to
discussion. Indeed, the lack of confidence in the United Nations and other international organizations has already undermined humanity’s expectations for justice and left mil-

lions of people without hope. It is that lack of confidence and
crisis of legitimacy that nurtures international terrorism, one
of the most serious challenges that we face today. The double
standards, to which oppressed people are subjected, extend a

lifeline to terrorism all over the globe. It is only natural for terrorist organizations to grow stronger in the absence of justice.

Turkey highlights this sad truth at every turn quite clearly.
We attempt to live up to our responsibilities toward humanity
by providing humanitarian assistance — not just talking about

the system’s corruption or demanding change. At this point,
Turkey’s international humanitarian

and development

aid

has exceeded $5 billion. It became the world’s most generous
country by allocating 0.79% of its national income to humanitarian assistance. Likewise, we are among those nations that

33

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

contribute most to international bodies like the World Food
Programme and the UN Capital Development Fund. Turkish organizations, including TIKA, AFAD and the Red Crescent, are capable of assisting people all over the world. We
engage in those activities with an inclusive and welcoming
approach, irrespective of the religious affiliation, identity or

backgrounds of the people we assist. We expect international
organizations to operate the same way. We will remain committed to our principled stance regarding the development of
solutions to humanity’s pressing problems. In this sense, we

will keep calling on the United Nations, starting with the Security Council, to become more inclusive and effective.

The principles that we have identified for a UN reform,
which are embodied by the motto, The world is bigger than five,
have been embraced by the vast majority of member states.
We maintain that speaking for humanity in advocacy of more
comprehensive and sustainable global justice and peace would
grant Turkey power and influence, rather than harm it. We are

determined to walk down this path in the future.
To accomplish that goal, this book primarily explains why
the United Nations requires restructuring. It also presents a

principled, comprehensive, fairer and applicable reform proposal for the UN. Our core principle is to vocally warn that
the current global system’s dynamics make it impossible for
the old order to survive. Therefore, we put forth and advocate

a revolutionary approach, which will radically challenge the
privileges linked to veto powers.

34

INTRODUCTION

It is neither moral nor fair for just five nations to make deci-

sions on issues that could influence the fate of the world. The
world is bigger than five countries. At the same time, this proposal reflects Turkey’s current foreign policy and, more broad-

ly, its approach to international politics. Turkey is opposed to
the preservation of an international order that supports the sta-

tus quo and looks out for the interests of just five nations.
A fairer and more stable international order is possible.

This book puts forth a reform proposal for the UN’s restructuring. The next chapters will primarily focus on recent
changes in world politics. Major ruptures have taken place
in world politics since the Cold War ended. This book concentrates on the problems, to which such ruptures gave rise,
and analyzes recent injustices and double standards in the

international arena. In this regard, the first part provides an
analysis of the current state of our international order. As part
of that analysis, it touches upon the problems of global governance — with the United Nations at the center.

It does not make a lot of sense to launch a reform process to
restructure the UN without adequately understanding the crisis that global governance has faced for many years. Therefore,
this book provides a historical and contemporary perspective
on why and how those crises erupted in certain areas.

The second part of the book is devoted to the presentation
of a reform proposal for the United Nations. It is extremely
important to determine which principles must be embraced

to engage in a discussion of reform on a strong footing. In this
35

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

regard, restructuring and reform must be rooted, first and foremost, in a sort of philosophy. That philosophical approach
must be capable of generating a fair, inclusive, result-oriented

and applicable reform proposal. At the same time, this second
part focuses on the main dynamics of reform and identifies
the areas in which reform must be implemented.
This work represents

a modest

attempt to fully reveal

the current global system’s corruption and to build a fairer,
peaceful and stable international order by reforming the United Nations.

36

PART |

Double Standards in International
Politics and the Need for a UN Reform

We are living in a historic moment. We are faced with a pan-

demic, caused by the Coronavirus, that impacts all of humanity. That pandemic places everyone at risk, regardless of their

race, gender or religion. The current state of affairs has deeply
affected all nations, large and small, irrespective of their financial power. The global supply chains came to a grinding halt.
International aviation, part and parcel of globalization, took a

big hit. At the same time, the international order is trying to
37

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

cope with many problems. Due to the structural problems of
international politics, the deepening crisis of global governance

and the international community's misguided policy choices,
oppressed people from Syria to Myanmar find themselves com-

pelled to leave the lands that they have occupied for decades.
Thousands of children are born at refugee camps every day,
many miles from their native countries. The dead bodies of
others wash up on beaches, silently, before the international
community’s eyes. Yet, other children are ruthlessly massacred
while playing on the beach. Barrel bombs target children at
school, patients at hospitals and worshippers at mosques. All

those things are happening at the beginning of the 21st century
— the supposed zenith of humanity’s modern history.

No one could claim that the world in which we live is fair
and sustainable. Nor can such grave oppression continue forever. It is necessary to restructure this system, which was built

in line with the international balance of power and political
climate in the aftermath of World War II, to promote global

justice. The institutions that form the basis of the existing
international order are rotting away in front of our very eyes
every passing day. The erosion of the international communi-

ty’s sense of political morality, too, becomes more and more

obvious by the day. The international community increasingly
disregards the principle of pacta sunt servanda, which is hun-

dreds of years old. Those nations, which pioneered the signing

of agreements and the creation of institutions, are now taking
steps that completely disregard those same agreements.

38

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

The Western nations strive to grant themselves certain
privileges by containing all problems in other parts of the
world instead of confronting those problems realistically,
despite their involvement in the establishment of this order.
They attempt to escape from all the problems that the international order’s inherent corruption causes in other places just

to perpetuate their own comfort. Indeed, the West seeks to
define the relationship between other countries and democra-

cy with reference to their place on the map — while portraying
itself as the champion of democracy. It is not possible for a
system that turns a blind eye to Bashar Assad’s regime, which
targeted hundreds of thousands of people with barrel bombs,
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles, to pro-

mote global peace and stability.
The problems with the existing order, which originated in
World War I, have become more visible in many areas today.
The most striking example is that the colonialist and imperi-

alist mindset still survives. That approach did not deliver justice, promote stability or contribute to the resolution of violent
conflicts at any point in time. Immediately after World War I,
the aforementioned mindset manifested itself in the form of
injustices generated by the established order. Since then, the
borders, drawn on a map with a ruler to serve imperial interests, have been the source of regional disputes and a sense of
injustice in many places, starting with the Middle East.
The Sykes-Picot Agreement, which was signed in secret,

was intended to create a new order that disregarded the opin39

A

FAIRER

WORLD

[S

POSSIBLE

ions of local people and states, the nature of local communities and history. Although the agreement ultimately could not
be implemented, the mindset it embodied hovered over the

Middle East throughout the 20" century like dark clouds.
The same mentality resurfaced in the 21% century. The ma-

jority of the problems that our neighborhood still experiences
are the products of that order and mindset. At this point, that
same order represents a threat to everyone’s peace.

Millions of people, who find their lives and property to be
at risk within their own country’s borders, are forced to flee.
Those states, whose borders were arbitrarily drawn accord-

ing to the geopolitical approach of the imperialists, attempt to
live up to that legacy by redesigning themselves against the
backdrop of civil war. Those states have collapsed one by one,
leaving behind power vacuums, out of which terrorist organ-

izations have emerged. The international community cannot
pretend migration and terrorism are security problems that

only threaten those parts of the world. As migrants keep going
West, terrorists came to target all nations. Acts of terrorism

take place not only in Kilis or Istanbul but also in Paris, Brussels, London and New York.
Nor can the international community turn a blind eye to
the root causes of terrorism. Let us remember that an inter-

national problem can only be solved with the right tools and
applicable methods inclusive enough to contain all the different parts of the international community. In this regard,
what we need is a sincere approach that is in sync with the

40

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

conscience of the global community. Therefore,
we call on
the entire world, starting with Western nations, to engage in
genuine cooperation with the rest to tackle pressing global
problems. Hence the vital importance of making the United

Nations system fair, inclusive, effective, functional, authoritative, accountable and seamless.

The global system and the international order face certain
problems today that require urgent precautions. The current
crisis is essentially about the problem of double standards.
Certain problems are conveniently ignored, while the global governance mechanisms are on the verge of collapse. The
most striking manifestation of that problem is the question of

irregular migration — a truly global issue. The current structures that govern that area are designed to defend oppressors

at the expense of the oppressed. The Syrian civil war’s consequences have clearly revealed the dilemmas of the global
system and the United Nations.
As the Syrian regime continues to engage in lawless actions

and human rights violations, Syrian citizens, who run away
from that oppression, are pushed back at the borders of Western nations. Thousands of people die every year after leaving
their native countries while risking their lives in an attempt to
cross the sea with plastic dinghies. The Mediterranean, once
home to ancient civilizations, now bears witness to state actors sinking refugees’ dinghies. Not only refugees but also our

humanity and universal values drown in the Mediterranean

Sea. Still, the international community’s conscience refuses
41

AP PATRIER

WiGIRIE

DMS

Pi0ts:SInB
EE

to acknowledge those facts. They do not think about anything
else but to keep migrants out.

Unfortunately, the refugees, who find a way to reach Europe, are not treated humanely. They become the target of
rising xenophobia and Islamophobia in that continent. Muslims, who run away from oppression and repression in their

native lands, end up being subjected to injustice and double
standards in European territories.
Turkey has been affected more severely than other nations

by the refugee problem emanating from Syria, with which
it shares a land border. Our country has been hosting more
than 4 million asylum seekers within its borders. From our
perspective, this is our responsibility toward fellow humans
— above all else. We do not take into consideration the qualifications, origins, race or sectarian affiliation of the people
who reach our border. The current situation, however, has
escalated beyond what a single country can accomplish with
its own resources.

Western nations talk a great deal about asylum seekers

yet do not come up with a single decent solution. They do
not seem to realize that the Syrian question must be resolved

to address the problem of migration. The West also failed to
keep its promises regarding financial assistance for refugees.

We have argued for years that a safe zone must be established
along our southern border to protect those innocent people.
Those countries that ignored that proposal now turn to odd
methods to stem the influx of refugees. For the record, the

42

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

solution is not to seal one’s borders or to build fences with
razor wire. The actual solution is to ensure that those people

can live peacefully in their own country. Only the United Nations can facilitate that solution.
Forced migration is but one challenge that the interna-

tional community faces today. From another perspective, the
international system is encountering a major security crisis.

The international order, which emerged under U.S. leadership after the Cold War, failed to promote stability. Quite the
contrary, it generated crises in many parts of the world. The
most significant of those crises was the security crisis, which
started on September 11, 2001. That security crisis manifests

itself in many ways. In this regard, terrorism represents one of
the most serious crises of our time.
Terrorism,

one of the most significant security issues of

the 21* century, is among the areas where the international
system’s double standards manifest themselves rather clearly.
No country can be safe in a world, where violence is so widespread. We notice, however, a certain level of hypocrisy when
it comes to the question of terrorism — as we do concerning migration. For years, Turkey called on the international community to form a united front against all forms of terrorism out of

principle. Western nations, however, were inclined to address
the issue from their perspective alone. In the end, they got in
the habit of supporting one terrorist entity to fight other terrorist organizations. That hypocritical approach to counterterrorism is among the most serious problems that we face today.
43

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

We encountered the same problem, once again, after the
July 15, 2016 coup attempt in Turkey. The terrorists, who attempted to stage a coup in our country and killed 251 citizens in the process, found a safe haven in Western countries.
Our closest neighbor was the first nation to welcome the coup
plotters. Though a common

stance and cooperation against

terrorism calls for a fight against all forms of terrorism, our
allies had no problem harboring those terrorists.
Our European allies, which denied entry to refugees running from barrel bombs and chemical weapons, offered protection to terrorists that claimed 251 lives in a single night.

Our so-called friends, which claim to have declared a war on
terrorism today, did not hesitate to support one terrorist entity to combat another terrorist organization. They have still
not revised their position on that issue.
It is not possible to end terrorism without a common stance

toward the problem. Such a position can only be adopted
within the UN framework. However, the UN cannot possibly

find a solution to international terrorism under the current
circumstances, with its current structure and in light of the
current challenges.
One of the main problems related to the question of terrorism

is about defining the concept. Neither the UN nor other international organizations have successfully defined international

terrorism. If there were a definition, could the United States, a
member of the Security Council, have been able to work with
the YPG terrorist organization in Syria? As such, we must first
44

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

develop a definition of terrorism on which the international
community can agree. The UN is one of the most important

platforms with regard to the development of such a definition.
The second terrorism-related problem regards the fight
against terrorism. The global governance mechanisms

not develop a common

can-

policy regarding counterterrorism.

No statement goes beyond wishful thinking. Influential international organizations cannot take joint action or put in

place mechanisms

for a solution. Countries that lost thou-

sands of citizens to terrorist attacks, in turn, find themselves

compelled to deal with more and more problems alone amid
global disagreements.
Yet another

problem

related to international

terrorism

takes place among nations. Some countries weaponize terror-

ism against others and refrain from making due effort to cooperate with other nations. This is certainly the most dangerous
tactic. After all, we cannot defeat international terrorism in

the absence of a common understanding,

a common mecha-

nism and a common, collectively devised type of action.

Most importantly, we are compelled to address the root
causes of terrorism. It is not possible to eliminate the source

of terrorism until the Syrian crisis is resolved. As injustices
deepen in the Middle East, they create a fertile ground for radical organizations to exploit. That is why the United Nations
has a huge responsibility.
International cooperation is key to coping with terrorism

as well as other global security challenges. The United Na45

G be Neither the UN nor other
international organizations have
successfully defined international
terrorism.

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

tions, in turn, must be the center of international cooperation.
Yet the organization falls short of contributing to the search

for solutions due to its current structure. If anything, the inherent imbalances within the UN system have turned it into
a problem. At this rate, global problems will grow exponentially and, to make matters worse, the risk of a conflict among
states will continue to increase.
That is why we urge everyone to acknowledge that those

global problems affect all parties before we can deal with
them. We must also realize that cooperation is needed for a
solution. If we want to work together, we must restructure the
United Nations to address injustices built into its system.

47

THE

DILEMMAS

OF GLOBAL

POLITICS

Global politics underwent major changes and transformations
in recent years. The Coronavirus pandemic, in particular, expedited the aforementioned transformation and elevated it to
a more serious level. In this regard, the Coronavirus pandemic made a profound impact on the transformation of the inter-

national system, which had been underway since the end of
the Cold War.
In truth, the global system’s transformation dates back to
2001. International terrorism, which spread after 9/11, and
the war on terror took the security crisis to the next level and
shook the foundations of the international system. That process, which began with the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq,
set off a series of developments that deeply influenced the
global system. It compelled the United States and Europe to
adopt securitization policies at home and abroad, and triggered a global economic recession accompanied by the 2008

financial crisis. As the economic crisis revealed the various

vulnerabilities of the global economic order, it also triggered
the rise of non-Western economies.

From the early 2010s, the economic crisis was followed by a
crisis of global governance. In the Middle East, the Arabs took
to the streets, demanding food, justice and freedom, and created a source of hope for that region’s future. The West’s insin-

cere attitude, however, allowed the advocates of special interests and the status quo, as opposed to the people, to get what
they wanted. As innocent people were massacred ruthlessly in
48

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED

FOR A UN REFORM

Syria, thousands of Egyptians, too, were designated an open
target. Over the course of a single night, more than 1,000 people lost their lives at Rabaa al-Adawiya Square. Having failed to
address the security and economic challenges, the internation-

al community thus encountered a major political crisis.
During the same period, Europe experienced political turmoil, as extremism occupied a more and more prominent position. At the same time, international terrorism triggered a
security crisis, which surpassed 9/11, as economic competi-

tion paved the way for trade wars among global players.
More

recently, the Coronavirus

pandemic

changed the

course of the pre-existing crisis of global politics, leaving the
international system vulnerable to scrutiny. As such, people
around the world began to ask, more and more frequently,
what the future held for the international system — which, for

the record, was a popular question since the end of the Cold
War — and to speculate more about it.
Who will assume the world’s leadership? Which country
will be the next leader? Who will pioneer global governance?
It is not possible to answer these questions. It is possible,
however, to describe this new state of global politics. It will
come to be understood that international politics will be more
multipolar in the Coronavirus pandemic’s aftermath. A greater

number of powers will exert influence over the international
system, as the global system moves away from its current state
and undergoes a comprehensive transformation. That devel-

opment, however, won't necessarily eliminate the dilemmas
49

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

that global politics currently faces.

A much more comprehen-

sive restructuring is needed for that kind of change to occur.
World politics remains in a state of chaos. Injustice and
war reign all across the globe. The great powers do not pay
adequate attention to matters that do not necessarily relate to

their national interests. Hundreds of thousands of people are
dying in civil wars. Terrorism is already threatening the entire
world. There are massive refugee waves in the making. Climate
change threatens not just certain regions, but all of humanity.

There is a shortage of joint action, however, to address
such security issues. Quite the contrary, each country makes
calculations with an eye on their narrowly defined interests,
thus deliberately avoiding any steps regarding those issues.
Even seemingly regional problems, such as migration and terrorism, whose global impact needs no explanation, are large-

ly ignored by the international community. Indeed, it is also
quite obvious that those phenomena undergo major changes

that could spark international armed conflicts. It is possible to
argue, notwithstanding, that many states, including the great
powers, subscribe to a reckless way of thinking when it comes
to those issues.
Protectionism and reactionary nationalism are on the rise.

Extremist movements are getting more popular all around —
including in the developed world. In many places, nationalism manifests itself in the form of protectionism and exclusive xenophobia, as opposed to patriotism. At the same
time, there is an uptick in society’s hostility toward migrants.
50

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

Assimilation and categorical rejectionism replace the ideas of
integration and peaceful coexistence. Instead of taking conciliatory steps, governments surrender to reactionary and ex-

clusive populism. The Turkish community in Germany, like
the North Africans in France, Latinos in the United States or
Blacks everywhere, face alienation.
There is an ongoing attempt to misportray Muslims as vio-

lent. Islamophobia continues to become more and more widespread. Politicians in many countries have shown little interest

in reasonable conduct. They fuel conflict, instead of promoting
social peace and stability. Instead of developing solutions with
softer methods, they preach exclusion and hate.
There is no sense in creating order and prolonging stabili-

ty. Instead, they attempt to feed off conflict and rage. No one
can survive this situation by burying their head in the sand.

Such problems cannot be addressed through isolation. Wherever we turn, however, we spot an escape from responsible
and comprehensive policies.
Europe, for example, suffers from a shortage of healthy dialogue on pressing problems, including the rise of xenophobia,
the deepening sense of insecurity, economic hardship, migration and terrorism. European governments still seem to be-

lieve that they can simply send immigrants back home. They
still think that they can shelter themselves from terrorism
unilaterally. European states, which carry on and ignore all
problems without unilateral solutions, have reached a certain
point, where they avoid any attempt at cooperation - even
51

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

with a partner like Turkey. They are even unable to take initiative regarding the situation in Syria, whose civil war gener-

ates migration and terrorism. As a matter of fact, they attempt
to exclude Turkey, whose cooperation they need to neutralize
threats emanating from that region, instead of taking any kind
of initiative. Instead of shaping the future, the Europeans re-

main stuck in past concepts and fundamentalist descriptions.
They cannot let go of the idea of anti-Turkishness. Despite
realizing that Turkey could be a very useful ally in areas like

counterterrorism and migration management, they fail to take
the necessary steps.
Take a good hard look at Europe’s leading powers — the United Kingdom, France and Germany. What kind of vision do they
offer for the future? We are saddened by the rise of far-right
movements in Germany. The French people have come to hate

the very idea of the European Union. The United Kingdom, in
turn, severed its ties with the European Union altogether. The
EU, which long dreamed of becoming the primary advocate for
universal moral values in world politics as well as democracy,
faces a very serious challenge today. It is the subject of a separate discussion to what extent Europe stands for those values

or actively defends them. It is quite sad, nonetheless, that it

turned out to be unable to uphold those values.
An even more serious problem is that Europe has emerged
as a geopolitical battleground, as was the case before World
War II. The bloodiest conflict in human history started in that
continent. Europe must not go through the same situation ever

52

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

again. Exclusive

nationalism,

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

economic

protectionism

and

xenophobia must not lead humanity to fresh tragedies. That

kind of chaos in Europe would certainly take a heavy toll on
world politics and undermine the pursuit of peace and justice.
Over the last two decades, a series of crises shook Europe.

One of the first crises took place right after 9/11. The security
climate, which 9/11 created in U.S. and European politics, did
not just influence the foreign policy of the relevant countries.
Shortly after 9/11, the al-Qaida terrorist organization began to

target European capitals one by one. That development made
a deep impact on Europe’s domestic policy and undermined
peace. Throughout Europe, governments adopted a policy that

targeted and alienated Muslims. All Muslims have been viewed
and depicted from a deeply prejudiced perspective. They were
alienated and discriminated against during that period.
That political crisis, which was born out of the security
crisis, became

noticeable during the European Constitution

debate. European values, which they once claimed to be universal, were defined with reference to Christianity instead of

universality. That was a serious failure. They reduced the essence of Europe to Christianity. The political crisis was fol-

lowed by an economic crisis. At the same time, a much deeper European crisis emerged. A continent-wide crisis, which

propelled the rise of far-right movements,

xenophobia and

racism, came to hold Europe at gunpoint.

At the end of the day, the European Union could not become an international player, as it failed to adopt a clear posi53

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

tion on any question of international relations. Having opted

to keep its distance from the Syrian crisis, the union attempted to secure Turkey’s support when confronted with a refugee
wave. The Europeans also watched the Libyan crisis from the
sidelines. Whereas some EU members threw their weight be-

hind the coup plotters in Libya, the rest chose to support the
country’s legitimate government.

That situation creates serious dilemmas in global politics.

Europe increasingly falls short of occupying the international
system’s center of gravity. Instead, the continent emerges as a

region preoccupied with its own problems. Through deepening isolation, Europe increasingly detaches itself from international politics.
On the other hand, the world’s remaining great powers continue to spread protectionism and reactiveness. The United

States, which was a staunch advocate for free trade for centuries, resorted to the most rigid forms of protectionism. The
trade wars against China only stand to impoverish, rather than

enrich, the world. That type of war is bound to be without
winners. In the end, the entire world stands to lose. Leaders

that pretend to meet the demands of certain domestic groups
by launching trade wars, despite their actual inability to cater
to the needs of those groups, propel their countries, together
with international politics, to the brink of catastrophe.
The United

States has promoted

international

organi-

zations globally for years. Since the League of Nations was
conceived, it argued that international organizations would
54

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

serve the cause of peace and justice. In the end, however, the
United States went down another path. A policy of isolation
from global politics became the dominant view in the country. The United States has since abandoned those international organizations, which it pioneered after World War II, just
as it turned its back on the League of Nations after World War
I. It seeks to go back to the way things were before. Yet we
all know what happened when the United States abandoned
international organizations the first time. Is it reasonable to

make the same mistake once more?
The United States, which preached a new world order in

the Cold War’s immediate aftermath, is no longer around. Yet a
new world order remains in the making. That period fueled the
expectation that the international system would become more
democratic. According to that view, the increase in the num-

ber of democracies could consolidate global peace and stability. In retrospect, what happened was the complete opposite,
since they used democracy like a stick. They falsely believed
that democracy could take hold through illegitimate methods,
as opposed to naturally. They subscribed to the same way of
thinking when they invaded Iraq. During the intervention in
Afghanistan, too, they assumed that a regime change could
put an end to terrorism. What happened in the end? Neither
Iraq nor Afghanistan could attain complete stability. Quite the
contrary, their populations had to endure greater pain.
The same mistake appears to have influenced their per-

spective on the global economy. They have advocated the lib55

& G

There are many (barely functional)
international organizations
around the world today. Those
organizations have never been fair.
They always served the pursuits of
the international hegemony and the
great powers.

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

eral economic order for many years. Instead of focusing on
those aspects of the global economic system, which fueled
crises, they imposed on others a different approach that was

geared toward generating more and more revenue. Nowadays,
in turn, they reject the emerging balance of power that man-

aged to grow despite those factors. They build higher walls to
curb trade every passing day. The American Dream is almost
over. It is no secret that this development, too, entails many

problems in international politics.

The dilemmas of international politics are not limited to
those issues either. There are many (barely functional) international organizations around the world today. Those organizations have never been fair. They always served the pursuits

of the international hegemony and the great powers. The United Nations, a political part of that network of organizations,
was abandoned to the whims of the Security Council’s five
permanent members

too. The United States, more

than any

other country, instrumentalized the United Nations. Like the
International

Monetary

Fund

and the World

Bank, which

represent the economic dimension, it became a tool for the
pursuit of international hegemony. Those institutions, which

were originally intended to facilitate assistance from the West
to the rest and to stabilize the financial markets, were repeat-

edly used to meddle in the political and economic life of developing nations. The World Trade Organization primarily

furthered the interests of developed nations. Needless to say,
the United States benefited more than others. Ironically, it is

ov

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

the United States that currently strives to undermine those
same institutions that it pioneered, advocates and from which
it disproportionately benefited. It demands more and more. As
it makes that demand and takes action to preserve the status
quo, it takes down the pillars of the very system that it built.
Even the United States, which benefited from international
cooperation more than any other country, does not think that it is
enough. Both the American people and U.S. politicians came to

constantly complain about things. The United States launched
a series of military operations, both unilaterally and through

the United Nations, after the Cold War. Those interventions did

not create order or promote stability. Iraq has been unable to
get back on its feet since 1991. A major country was invaded

based on the excuse that it had weapons of mass destruction.
The people of Iraq were promised democracy, yet ended up in
a place where terrorist organizations could operate freely. Hun-

dreds of thousands of Iraqis were killed in their homes during a
war, to which they were not a party. Hardly anyone cared that
Iraq’s citizens died, en masse, in a war that they did not choose
to fight. In contrast, U.S. military casualties were on everyone’s

mind. It is wrong to compare and rank people’s suffering. Yet,
800,000 Iraqi deaths did not attract nearly as much attention

from the world as the loss of some 5,000 American soldiers. The
United States launched that war amid objections from all over

the world and ended up complaining more than any other nation about its repercussions. Finally, it abandoned Iraq in 2011,
without a proper plan in place or having created some level

58

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

of order. The country became a place where terrorist groups
fought one another. Again, the United States complained about
that situation more than everyone else.
Something similar took place during the Syrian civil war,

as well. Originally, there was a pledge to support the country’s democratization.

People in many Arab countries, in-

cluding Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and Syria, took to the streets,
demanding democracy and freedom during the Arab Spring.
Those people, however, were abandoned at the most crucial

moment. Libya was divided into pieces; whereas Egypt was
handed over to coup plotters. Yemen and Syria, in turn, were
dragged into civil war. At the same time, Syria became a playground for terrorist organizations. The United Nations did not
register or respond to these developments. Instead of playing
a just and responsible role in the Syrian civil war, the United States opted to support one group of terrorists against another. Today, the U.S. does not hesitate to train and arm the
PYD, a terrorist entity, and its armed wing, the YPG, under

the pretext of fighting Daesh. Unfortunately, it did not adopt
a principled position. As the people of Syria and Iraq had to
endure tragedies as a result of wars that they did not start,

the great powers only seemed to care about terrorism and migration — and treated those issues exclusively as problems.
Daesh, which was born out of the power vacuum in those

two countries, hurt the citizens of those nations more than

any other. Still, the West complained much more than those
victims. In the end, those places evolved into a stage, where

59

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

terrorist groups could settle scores among themselves. Proxy

wars came to take the nations hostage. Those folks ended up
in the middle of a fight that they did not choose. The world
remains uninterested in their oppression. The United Nations
is in no shape to meet humanity’s expectations.

The current state of affairs is not unprecedented. Mankind experienced similar problems in the past. Everything that preceded World War II seems to be repeating itself. The quest for order
and justice has given way to a clash between narrowly defined
and mutually exclusive interests. For the time being, problems
like terrorism and migration remain on the agenda because the
international community sees them as the top priority and most
proximate threats. Beyond it all, however, is a vicious cycle in
the making. Tensions between nations could lead to much bigger problems, as the great powers conveniently neglect their responsibilities. All kinds of struggle, from trade wars to diplomatic confrontations and intelligence wars, further escalate those

tensions. It only takes a minor development to trigger tensions.
Indeed, all major crises in history started that way.
The various challenges that the global system faces have

gradually reached a certain point, where they become unmanageable. That they could quickly turn into international
conflicts, which could pull in multiple players, is no longer a

remote possibility. In other words, the problem at hand goes
beyond non-state actors and social problems. The possibility
of a minor spark between two states in any part of the world
starting an all-out war requires everyone to think and act.

60

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

We must overcome those challenges. We must tackle those
problems head-on. What is the right platform to accomplish

those goals, if not the United Nations? If the United Nations
won't get to work today, when will it? Is it really so difficult
to take preventive measures? Is there no room for the pursuit

of justice and peace in the global agenda?

THE

UN’S

PROBLEM

OF LEGITIMACY

The United Nations faces many problems today. One of the
most important problems relates to the UN’s problem of legitimacy. That problem is both rooted in its history and related to the organization’s current challenges. The root cause

of all those problems, however, is the UN Security Council.
The United Nations and the Security Council face a crisis of

legitimacy, which relates to three issues: Legal matters, questions pertaining to its day-to-day functioning and types of action. The UN Security Council, which overstepped its original mandate, passed many resolutions that infringed upon
the sovereign rights of member states. At this point, when the
Security Council, whose job is to prevent conflict, maintain
peace and promote order globally, can resort to interventions
that effectively eliminate the sovereign rights of states, it is an
extremely complex problem.

For example, the UN Security Council in 2003 did not find
the U.S. administration’s argument credible that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction and supported terrorism.

61

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

Nonetheless, the UN could not create a mechanism to hold
Washington accountable due to its unilateral occupation.
The same

goes for terrorism, humanitarian

interventions

and sanctions. Although there are objective criteria for the
conduct of humanitarian interventions, the United Nations
and its Security Council have generally found it difficult to
implement the aforementioned criteria.

We are faced with a UN order that is stuck between legality and legitimacy. Having waited too long in Bosnia, the UN
Security Council could not decide on intervention in Koso-

vo due to disagreements. In the end, NATO was compelled
to step in. Something similar took place concerning the sit-

uation in Syria, as well. Although some 500,000 people lost
their lives there, the UN could not take the necessary steps
to end the crisis. Could such an organization have an ounce
of legitimacy? Can the UN exercise any amount of authority
over an increasingly dynamic and complex international sys-

tem, provided that it falls victim to conflicts of interest to be
discredited every passing day? One cannot resort to inaction

in response to crises and pretend to be the world’s chief legislative body — to the extent that it suits the interests of the five
permanent members.

The UN Security Council’s problem of legitimacy is not limited to that question of legality either. There is a consensus that

the Council suffers from a crisis of legitimacy in terms of its
functioning and procedures. In this regard, it is clear that the

UN Security Council lacks the kind of fair and accepted mech62

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

anisms that comply with international norms. That ‘situation
results in a shortage of legitimacy vis-a-vis its procedure and
functioning. To compensate for that deficit, the decision-mak-

ing process must involve a new structure, whereby member
states are included, in line with the international norms. More

importantly, those decision-making processes must be objective and transparent enough for all other members to monitor

the proceedings. That does not mean that the Security Council
ought to continue its operations without making any changes. Still, the current methods of decision-making give rise to a
problem of legitimacy in a procedural sense.
Another source of the deficit of legitimacy is the Council’s growing inability to find desperately needed solutions. In

this regard, keeping in mind the UN Security Council’s stated
mission and objectives, there is no doubt that it cannot take

effective precautions

against international problems — nor

overcome them. Could the Security Council prevent conflict
and promote peace, stability and order — provided that it only
considers its own priorities?

There are many reasons behind the problem of legitimacy. The most fundamental issue, though, is that the Security
Council was positioned at the heart of the UN’s founding phi-

losophy. Although the number of member states has already
climbed to 193, only a small fraction views the United Na-

tions as legitimate. A closer look at the discussions held at
the General Assembly reveals that 73 percent of all member
states have a generally negative impression of the organiza-

63

G 4

Could a system, which assumes
that the strong are always right
due to the volume of their voice,
deliver justice?

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

tion. Could a system, which assumes that the strong are al-

ways right due to the volume of their voice, deliver justice?
Is it possible to meddle in a given country’s fate, despite
near-unanimous decisions by the General Assembly, just because the most powerful nations so desire?
Such a system is neither fair nor legitimate.

THE

PROBLEM

OF GLOBAL

JUSTICE

The UN’s problem of legitimacy is not limited to the aforementioned issues either. We face a very serious problem of global
justice caused by the United Nations system itself. When U.S.

President Woodrow Wilson called for the establishment of the

League of Nations in the first quarter of the 20" century, his
purpose was to promote global peace by putting a lid on violent clashes between states. Unfortunately, the Western pow-

ers that formed and endorsed the League of Nations did not
keep their promises. Instead, they remained committed to the

pursuit of their imperialist agendas. The system, which they
created to defend victims against aggressors, ended up neither
defending the victims nor stopping the aggressors. Quite the
contrary, those nations themselves chose to become aggressors.
Such mistakes gave rise to two grave consequences: The loss of

50 million lives and the deliberate use of nuclear weapons as
a purely punitive measure — a source of shame for humanity.

After World War II, the victors reached a more comprehensive agreement, whereby they took a step toward global
65

AVFATRERSWOREDPHS

POS SIBIhE

peace and stability by attempting to stop wars pre-emptively.

However, they left those two strategic objectives to the mercy of just five countries. Those five great powers entered a
geopolitical race in other countries and parts of the world in-

stead of preventing war — just like they had done after World
War I. They also attempted to invade those nations. As part of

that geopolitical struggle, they supported bloody coups. They
also overthrew governments, sometimes directly, completely

disregarding the demands of local residents. They encouraged bloody wars that cost thousands of human lives. They

engaged in or indirectly sponsored dirty wars and bloody conflicts everywhere — from Latin America and the Far East to
Southeast Asia and Africa. They did not hesitate to use weapons that had been prohibited under their own conventions. In
doing so, they turned a blind eye to the centuries-old legacy of
the laws of war — a part of human history. They have neither

promoted justice nor prevented wars. Nor could they restore
peace and stability. They destroyed a nation, citing weapons

of mass destruction, based on blatant lies. Through embar-

goes, they caused thousands of children to die or to suffer permanent injuries due to a lack of access to medicine. Instead

of promoting justice, the system they designed only served to

create a massive deficit of justice - which is extremely difficult to address. All those developments took place under the

watch of the United Nations and the international community.
The last three centuries represented a time when humanity
was sacrificed for the sake of pursuing natural resources, while

66

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

justice was placed on hold. To extract those resources, they

occupied people’s lands and, later, put them in shackles and
enslaved them. Finally, their natural resources were exploited.
They took everything that the people had. Today, they shut the
door on those same folks, whom they subjected to material and
spiritual exploitation — not to mention massacres. Racism is al-

ready out of control. Xenophobia features more and more prominently in graffiti on walls along European streets. We all appreciate now that the same cruel system cannot stay intact in the
21% century. A mindset, which does not value human beings

by virtue of their humanity, cannot possibly promote global security and peace. It is impossible to prevent the desertification

of the earth at a time when people’s conscience suffers from
the same problem. Before all else, we must enrich everyone’s
conscience with justice, mutual respect, peace and compassion.

The peace, welfare and safety of future generations depend
on the steps and precautions that we will take today. It is time
to show leadership and tackle problems head-on while keeping in mind our conscientious responsibilities. Otherwise, the
world may end up having to experience a particularly dark

age with no end in sight. We may face the danger of losing our
chance to build a new world by the time everyone wakes up
from that darkness.
This is a sensitive time when the whole world faces historic challenges in different ways. Economic slowdown, the
global pandemic, poverty and income inequality all remain

on our agenda. Global problems — including wars, mass migra67

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

tion fueled by internal strife, human and drug trafficking, terrorism, extremist movements, ethnic and sectarian conflicts,
and the consumption of natural resources — come to attract

more

and more

attention. People in many countries suffer

from hunger, epidemics, poverty and ignorance. We cannot

assume any of those issues to be independent of the outside
world. Those problems are not exclusively rooted in misguided decisions by the relevant governments. Indeed, they tend
to be global, as opposed to regional, in nature. For example,
the problem of starvation in Africa is rooted in the discrimina-

tory paradigm and practices that keep intact the global system
— which deepens global injustice and the North-South divide.

Poverty, economic bankruptcy and fighting in Latin America
do not solely originate from the political approaches of those
nations. The radical groups in Myanmar cannot have burned
Muslim homes or left those folks hungry and impoverished
by themselves. The international community, too, bears re-

sponsibility for those developments because it ignored them.
The current state of affairs is incompatible with human dignity and conscience as well as deeply embarrassing. To make
matters worse, many of those crises and conflicts could be

resolved with relative ease. We must deal with them all in a
fast, effective and determined fashion. The United Nations, in

turn, ought to be at the heart of that struggle.
We need to acknowledge that we live in the age of globalization. The means of mass communication are capable of delivering news from one place to another part of the world instantly.

68

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

At the same time, human mobility has reached unprecedented
levels. People from different races and cultures often live in
the same country as tourists, workers and migrants. The leading Western capitals are no longer demographically homoge-

neous. Cities like Berlin, London, Madrid, Paris and New York
(as well as African, Asian, Middle Eastern and Central Asian

capitals) are home to multiple cultures, religions and civili-

zations. Feeding off discrimination, xenophobia, racism and
anti-religious sentiment in this age of integrated globalization

would only mean a return to the Middle Ages.
We must also approach global politics from the same perspective. It is obviously difficult to create

a homogeneous

global community by bridging the gap between our differences. Nonetheless, it is possible to reconcile our differences
to some extent. We must view our differences as a source of
wealth, which we can use to rebuild the global conscience —

rather than destroy it. We ought to protect the oppressed and
stop the oppressors. That kind of approach alone can lead to
the resolution of the question of justice. In this day and age,
the globalization of conscience, too, has become inevitable.
The global conscience must not be a concept devoid of mean-

ing. We cannot afford to race each other to silence the global conscience just because it happens to harm our interests.

Power does not constitute, build or preserve the international
order exclusively. All systems and orders need a mentality
rooted in justice. Justice must give everyone what they are en-

titled to — and put in their place anyone that demands what is

69

ky i

The world’s seemingly powerful
nations, too, were crippled by
the pandemic. The economic
destruction caused by the virus
is also clearly visible.

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

not rightfully theirs. Both principles, then, must have a place
in the international community’s conscience. Think of Palestine, which has been a bleeding wound for so many years.
Can there be any room for a mindset in the global conscience

that aims to deprive the people of their native lands? Can the
global conscience, which remains silent in the face of injustice, deliver justice within the United Nations framework?

What justice needs more than anything is conscience.

The new and negative impact of the Coronavirus pandemic on globalization processes requires the entire international
community to work together. We need a global perspective, a
strategic vision and a political commitment to cope with global

problems. At a time when global politics becomes more mutually dependent in all areas, it seems impossible to oppose that

trend and to stop that process. We neither wish to see trade barriers nor condone the behavior of those nations that violate the
rules of commerce. What we want, instead, is to bring down the
global order of exploitation and replace it with a fair economic
order. The existing order, under which the welfare and comfort
of one part of the world depend on the exploitation and victimization of another region, has reached a certain point — which
places at risk everyone’s peace and welfare. Hence the need to

promote justice in the political arena as well as economic life.
Under an economic order, where all countries are interdependent, the distinction between developed and developing
nations is inherently artificial. The exclusion of developing na-

tions from the global economic order takes a toll on all countries
71

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

and their welfare. We cannot afford to forget that the development of those nations, too, is a by-product of the global order.
Any attempt to keep a lid on developing nations based on those

artificial distinctions represents an impediment to the creation
of a balanced international order. Each country wants to play a
role within the global economy in line with its prominence. An
approach that dismisses smaller economies and seeks to mount
pressure on the rising economies through political and economic means, however, would effectively rule out the possibility
of a fair economic order. Worst of all, such a mentality would
encourage more resistance against those players that are deter-

mined to uphold the status quo. If not today, then tomorrow,
will they be crushed under the weight of that injustice.

At a time when positive and negative developments impact
all nations simultaneously, we cannot solve any problems without joining forces or living up to our responsibilities. Today, all

of mankind feels the negative side effects of problems in Southeast Asia, Africa and the Middle East. The wave of migration,
which the Syrian crisis triggered, impacted not just neighbor-

ing countries, such as Turkey, but a much larger part of the
world — if not all of the globe. The raging civil war in Yemen,
in turn, causes hostilities that will deeply shake the region to

become consolidated. The destruction of that country’s already
poor infrastructure resulted in a water shortage, which start-

ed a cholera epidemic. Every passing day, we encounter fresh

threats, problems and challenges — such as organized crime, cyberattacks, food insecurity, global public health crises, climate

72

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

change, discrimination, xenophobia and Islamophobia. The
drought in the Horn of Africa, like nuclear tests and ballistic
missile trials, puts international security and stability at risk.
No country is in a position to fully isolate itself from ongoing humanitarian crises. Nor do they, for the record, have

the right to do so. At the end of the day, all problems are
bound to affect everyone. Even the most robust economies
and the most developed nations may be helpless in the face of
deepening security concerns. As the Coronavirus pandemic

clearly established, human health must be among our top priorities. In the end, no country could protect itself completely.

The world’s seemingly powerful nations, too, were crippled
by the pandemic. The economic destruction caused by the
virus is also clearly visible.

The problem of global injustice manifests itself in various
ways — one of them being the inability of international organizations to function effectively. Innocent people around the
world pay the price for the failure of international organiza-

tions to live up to their responsibilities — in lives lost, destruction and suffering. Tragic developments that hurt humanity’s
conscience take place in Syria, Iraq, Palestine, Egypt and many
other places today. Instead of assuming leadership, the inter-

national community watches from the sidelines. Those institutions, which ought to address such problems, end up effective-

ly encouraging those incidents due to their corrupt structures.
The international system’s corruption, mistakes and shortcom-

ings crush humanity in all areas. Yet we speak up about those
73

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

issues. Not only the residents of certain countries are entitled

to justice, peace, confidence and welfare. All 7.8 billion people that inhabit Earth ought to enjoy those same rights and opportunities. Humanity cannot, and will not, find peace until

the blood of innocent people, including women and children,
stops flowing for the sake of dirty political calculations.
The violent conflict and instability unfolding in our neighborhood, and various parts of the world, deeply impact us all.
There are now ungovernable countries around us. Syria, of
course, immediately comes to mind.

It is impossible to address the region’s remaining problems or to restore peace and stability, without resolving the
ongoing conflict in Syria. The migration issue, in turn, cannot

be resolved as long as more than half of all Syrians remain
displaced. The related security issues won’t go away either
until the state apparatus of that country, where a multitude of
terrorist organizations remain operational, is politically and
institutionally restructured.

We must transform Syria, which has been turned into a stage
for global power struggles, into a source of life for its people
anew. We must facilitate that solution by agreeing on a solu-

tion that all Syrians shall deem acceptable. Anyone that fails to
contribute to the resolution of the Syrian crisis bears responsibility for the men and women who throw themselves, and their

children, at the cold waters of the Mediterranean. It is time for

the international community to finally work actively together,
share the burden and act sincerely regarding that issue.
74

THE

REFUGEE

CRISIS

The international community

faces a rare migration crisis.

There are some 260 million migrants, over 80 million displaced
persons and close to 25 million refugees around the world today. Their numbers grow every passing day due to economic
factors as well as starvation, famine, civil wars, terrorist attacks
and political uncertainty. Those people end up having to relocate to stay alive, feed themselves and find food for their chil-

dren — instead of finding a better job or improving their living
standards. Unfortunately, those hopeful ventures frequently result in death. Some 20,000 people — most of them women and
children — have lost their lives in the Mediterranean since 2013.
Thousands of innocent people have died in the heat of the Sahara Desert. Indeed, there is great suffering behind what we describe as “the refugee crisis” in general terms. The dead bodies
of young children, which washed up on beaches, showed the
world that this problem can be ignored no longer. I do not point
out those facts as the president of a country located far from
conflict zones and irregular migration routes; I highlight them
as the president of Turkey, which, according to UN data, hosts
more asylum seekers than any other country in the world.
The question of refugees is one of the most serious challenges that the international system faces today. That crisis,
like many others, deepens due to conflicts of interests between states, the weakness of international institutions and,

most fundamentally, the UN’s ineffectiveness. We face today
the greatest challenge of refugees since the end of World War
75

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

II. For that reason, this is a time when the reform process for
the UN’s restructuring is critically important.
The UN’s inability to play its role gave rise to very serious
deadlocks regarding global justice. It is for the same reason that
we face a great challenge concerning refugees today. Unfortu-

nately, none of the desperately needed steps have been taken
to date. There was no attempt to tackle the root causes of the
problem. Neither the United Nations nor the international community stepped in when innocent people became the targets of

bombs. When the global migration crisis erupted as a result,
there was an attempt to prevent people from going to safer places. That attitude toward migrants was extremely significant,

as it revealed the true face of the West and the international
community, which is assumed to reflect global human values.
Our Syrian brothers and sisters have been fighting for their

very survival since 2011. Hundreds of thousands of people
have lost their lives in acts of state terrorism and the devastating actions of terrorist organizations. Millions of people have
been displaced. Millennia-old cities, along with libraries and
hospitals, have been reduced to rubble. Under those circumstances, European states have not cared about so-called West-

ern values, such as human rights, democracy and freedom,
since the Syrian crisis began. The Syrian people have been
left alone in their fight for liberty and resistance. For nine
years, Syria’s oppressed population has been left to the mercy

of a regime that did not hesitate to use every type of weapon,
including chemical weapons, to target civilians (and, in fact,

76

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

took pride in those actions). Nor did it care about the suffering

of innocent children.
The international community has not shed a single tear
for the tens of thousands of people who perished in the cold
waters of the Mediterranean and the Aegean Sea. Those, who
made no effort to help migrants, who faced all sorts of challenges, including humiliation and abuse, upon reaching Europe, immediately became self-proclaimed champions when
it came to Turkey. They have been making irrational comparisons about Turkey without an ounce of shame regarding their
own actions. Indeed, they go further, shamelessly announcing

that they are prepared to welcome everyone under the guise
of political asylum. Ironically, they keep looking for ways to
prevent those people from reaching Europe in the first place.

Their goal is to seal the continent’s borders. Most Western nations have viewed the question of irregular migration from Syria from the perspective of national security and national inter-

est. They entertained the deeply misleading idea that barbed
wire could shelter Europe from the refugee wave. Indeed, we
have witnessed shameless proposals that will be remembered
as an embarrassment in the future, such as sinking refugee din-

ghies. They implemented the policy of pushbacks at all costs
and abandoned those individuals in the Mediterranean.
They also assume that they can make their problems go away
with financial assistance. Their goal is to keep asylum seekers
away, no matter where they end up going. However, we would

not have encountered such problems today had those nations
dg.

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

aligned their conduct with the main principles outlined in the
main framework of international agreements, international organizations and, most fundamentally, the United Nations.

Among the top challenges faced by refugees are xenophobia and anti-migrant discourse, which have been on the rise
in recent years. It is shameful to engage in politics over the

plight of people who had to leave everything behind and tap
into society’s prejudice in an attempt to score political points.

Cutting aid to Palestinian refugees to discipline them with
deprivation and poverty, too, is equally inhumane. It is crucial to combat discriminatory practices and to promote harmony between refugees and the host communities for ensuring social peace and overcoming ongoing crises.

The right to life, along with democracy and liberty, which are

considered among the most fundamental rights of the citizens
of Western countries, have been treated like a luxury when the
people of Syria demanded them. The world continues to mimic the three monkeys, as democratic demands and the rights of
people, who defend their dignity, are trampled on. At this point,

we do not hear from advocates of democracy, rights and liber-

ties. The international community has also failed to respond to
the plight of the Rohingya people - a Muslim community that
resides in Rakhine State, Myanmar. In this regard, it failed to
completely prevent that tragedy from unfolding.
Is there only democracy for sovereign powers? Are underdeveloped or developing nations, and their citizens, not entitled to democracy, rights and liberties?
78

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

If we fail to speak the truth in which we believe, the righteous
will never prevail and the oppressors will take control of the
world. In truth, our objection represents the common voice of
all developing and underdeveloped nations around the world.
It is not possible to ignore that voice or to disregard our dissent.
The system of global security, which looks out for the interests of oppressors as opposed to the oppressed, has ceased to be
sustainable in its current state. We must collectively acknowledge that the Western-centric world belongs to the past — that

a new world with multiple centers has already emerged. The
influx of refugees and migrants into the West, starting with the
European countries, is due to the failure to accept that fact and
to make necessary structural changes. Indeed, the people who

board dinghies, old boats and rundown ships on the Mediterranean’s eastern shore to reach Europe are merely looking for

peace, welfare and an opportunity to survive.
Western nations, which identified the criteria for fundamental human rights and liberties after World War II and became their symbols, have unfortunately turned their backs
on those same values. Every human being - men and women, young and old, children — that dies in the Mediterranean
or the Aegean and washes up on our shores inflicts a severe
wound in our hearts. We do not see any indication or regret
from those folks that leave them to die in the Mediterranean
and the Aegean. A global system that runs out of compassion
cannot address any of humanity’s problems.
As a country with close ties with its neighbor and Syria’s
citizens, Turkey has extensively experienced the side effects
ih)

& fe Complete isolation is not the way
to end the raging crisis in our
neighborhood. The real solution is
to ensure that their native lands
are liberated from violence without
further delay.

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

of the tragedy unfolding in the country. Our country currently
hosts some 4 million refugees, including 3.6 million Syrians
and over 365,000 people from various places. We have wel-

comed all those aggrieved persons irrespective of their religious affiliation or ethnic background. We view that approach
as our responsibility toward fellow human beings.
However, this unprecedented challenge has already escalat-

ed beyond the limits of any single nation’s capabilities. In truth,

the problem deepens precisely because those who had to leave
their homes and native lands grow less hopeful about their
eventual return. We cannot solve any problems emanating from
Syria, starting with migration and terrorism, in the absence of a
solution that all Syrians find acceptable. For this purpose, the
international community has no choice but to work together.

Those individuals who flee wars and head to the West
wish to return to their own countries. Yet the current cir-

cumstances in their native lands prevent them from living
there. We see clearly that the people who show up on Turkey’s doorstep have no intention of ultimately settling in host
countries. Over the years, we have done everything in our
power and engaged with all relevant parties to keep innocent

people alive and to establish a safe zone across our southern
border. We have made that same offer to the President of the
United States as well as Western countries and Russia. Those

nations, which ignored the proposal, currently turn to odd
methods to stem the influx of refugees.
The crisis in our neighborhood, with Syria and Iraq as

its epicenters, is unacceptable for Turkey and the rest of the
81

A’ FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

world. We have already seen how the problems that start in
those places have quickly brought bloodshed and fire to other parts of the globe. The terrorist attacks in Europe and the
United States immediately come to mind. The refugee ques-

tion cannot be resolved by shutting the door on those people or building high walls with razor wire. Unfortunately, we
have witnessed time and again that there is no peace to be

found behind barbed wire and border walls.
Complete isolation is not the way to end the raging crisis
in our neighborhood. The real solution is to ensure that their

native lands are liberated from violence without further delay.
It requires new opportunities to secure the political and economic future of these communities and to ensure that a new

government that listens to the people comes to power. Once
we accomplish these goals, people will have no reason to end
up within our borders or at Europe’s doorstep. Any step taken
without understanding the root cause of the refugee question

and developing relevant solutions will lead to nothing but fresh
images that inflict severe wounds on humanity’s conscience.

The international community, starting with the developed
nations, failed the test of recent crises in Syria and Iraq. They
had failed in the Balkans, too, in the past. Nowadays, they are
making the same mistakes regarding Palestine. I am confident
that we can implement a plan, in light of lessons learned, capa-

ble of stopping the fighting and adapting to the region’s histor-

ical, cultural, religious and sectarian realities. Turkey supports
and will continue to support all efforts geared toward that goal.
82

THE

PROBLEM

OF INTERNATIONAL

TERRORISM

International terrorism is another major problem that neces-

sitates the UN’s restructuring. Terrorism has evolved into a
more international problem than at any other point in history. September 11, 2001, was a turning point, as the Amer-

ican people and the international community encountered

the ruthless face of terrorism. Later, the terrorist organization
al-Qaida targeted civilians in Madrid, London, Istanbul and

elsewhere without mercy. Unfortunately, the international
community could not develop a common definition of terrorism at a time when terrorism openly threatened global peace.
In other words, it proved impossible to clearly define what
constituted an act of terrorism — and what did not. To add
insult to injury, there was an effort to distinguish between

“sood” terrorists and “bad” terrorists. There has been no attempt to stop collaborating with certain terrorist organizations to defeat other terrorist groups. Some governments not

only fed and sheltered terrorists but also hosted members of
known terrorist entities in their palaces.

The first quarter of the 21* century constitutes a new
peak for humanity in terms of science, technology, economic
development and health care. Yet there is a darker, embarrassing side of that coin. Hundreds of thousands of women
and children continue to face death in Syria, Iraq and other
countries suffering under wartime conditions. Refugees, who
escaped death and oppression, are being humiliated in Euro-

pean cities. Meanwhile, terrorist entities like al-Qaida, Daesh
83

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

and the PYD-YPG continue their operations in the region.
The disagreements in the Caucasus, too, threaten to result in
hot conflicts. Numerous problems are still awaiting solutions

from Yemen to Ukraine.
We could not translate the pain we experienced after bombings in Syria, Iraq, Nigeria,

France, Pakistan, Turkey, Belgium

and Spain into a common position, discourse and action. We

failed to find a solution to political struggles, injustices and
inequality that fuel violence. We could not persuade the world
that one of the most effective weapons against the root causes of violence was to go beyond our differences and promote
mutual understanding and dialogue. We could not develop a
shared understanding that it was necessary to replace polarization with the culture of reconciliation. We failed to spread
the view that cultural, ethnic and religious differences were a

source of wealth, instead of threats — that tolerance and harmony ought to prevail everywhere and in all relevant areas.

As responsible leaders of the 21* century, we have an obligation to stop this dangerous trend. After all, humanity can
no longer bear the wounds inflicted on our conscience by po-

larization and tensions rooted in religion and culture. Today,
we live in a world where 60 million people live away from

their homes due to violent conflicts in their native countries.

The hopeful journey of innocent people — mostly women and
children — leads to terrible tragedies in dark waters. Those

who manage to reach their destination face other problems,
including alienation and being treated like suspects.
84

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

A quick look at the geographical source of those tragedies
reveals a situation full of contradictions. There are armed
groups, claiming to act in the name of Islam, that subject Muslims to the-worst massacres and hurt them more than others. Through the proxy of terrorist organizations, thousands
of years of civilization are destroyed as ancient cities are reduced to rubble. Due to the perception the entities create,
xenophobia and Islamophobia have spread in the West like
wildfire. We have witnessed that some ill-intentioned groups

exploit that opportunity and take it upon themselves to sow
division, to plant seeds of hate instead of love and to engage
in alienation. As such, the widening gap between people from
different civilizations,

religious backgrounds

and cultures

serves as a precursor to much more serious catastrophes.
All states must work hard in places like Europe, where terrorist organizations and their affiliates remain highly active.
We must not let terrorist entities, separatists or destructive

groups operate freely. We must develop a common approach,
a common mechanism and a common sort of action to combat
terrorism.

Terrorism itself is not the most serious problem in the

world today. The most serious challenge the world faces, instead, is the hypocritical and insincere approach to terrorist
organizations. After all, terrorist groups derive most of their
power and support from that attitude. Unfortunately, certain

Western countries make the grave mistake of treating and
making sense of terrorist organizations according to their dis85

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

course and ideology. There are no good terrorists. We cannot
subscribe to the view that one group of terrorists is good, and
another group of terrorists is bad.
We cannot keep silent in the face of double standards and
actions that ultimately harm our citizens. We can no longer
allow the West to project its own dilemmas and problems on

Muslims and the Islamic world to conceal them. Indeed, failure
to respond to that attitude within the limits of democracy only
serves to encourage and embolden its subscribers. I fear that

the West will grow more and more reckless if we stop speaking
up about its mistakes. Our silence would permit the West to
treat terrorist groups like al-Qaida and Daesh as “bad terrorists”

— and other terrorist entities like the PKK, YPG, DHKP-C and
FETO, which do not hurt Western interests, as “good terrorists.”
For the record, it is not just the West that suffers from that problem. The Islamic world, too, ought to engage in self-criticism.
Turkey has experienced a lot of pain due to terrorism.
Unfortunately, our allies belatedly came

to appreciate our

suffering. There is an attempt to undermine our hard work
and sacrifice in the fight against the PKK, which has killed

some 50,000 Turkish citizens over the last 34 years, by taking
that organization’s “alphabet soup” at face value. There is a
complete disregard for politicians who were killed in front of

their children. The same people refrain from saying anything
about Israel killing young people at its border with Gaza or

targeting rockets at children on a beach. Those, who criticize
our righteous efforts, fail to speak up against a firing squad
86

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

executing Palestinians in front of cameras. Those, who make
accusations

against Turkey regarding so-called journalists

convicted of theft, extortion or terrorism, effectively celebrate
the execution of journalists trying to document Israel’s massacres. Those people, who mount pressure on Muslim countries regarding minority rights, conveniently ignore the ethnic cleansing campaign against Muslims in many African and
Asian countries. Their double standards and hypocrisy are
still intact. Consequently, perception management operations

against Turkey continue to escalate.

To be perfectly honest, we find it difficult to understand

why the international community, which invoked Article 5 of
the North Atlantic Treaty when the United States suffered the
deadliest terrorist attack in its history on 9/11, responded to

the catastrophe that befell Turkey on July 15, 2016, quite differently. By no means do we tolerate lenience toward terrorist
organizations. We cannot stomach the fact that Turkey was left
alone in its fight against terrorism. It is simply unacceptable
that our supposed friends continue to harbor the murderers
who attacked our democracy and killed 251 Turkish citizens.
We have all seen that those countries, which claimed to
have gone to Syria and Iraq to fight terrorism, did not actually care about the local population. We learned that from
the hundreds of thousands of casualties and the destruction
of their great history. It is no secret that the Western powers can do many things and how they ring the alarm bells

as soon as their interests are at risk. We also know that they
87

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

come from thousands of kilometers away when petroleum,
gold, diamonds or their market shares are at stake. Yet we
are fully aware that those same nations turned their backs on

the massacres in Palestine, the genocide in the Rakhine State,
and the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people in Syria,
our neighbor. The problem here is not limited to ignoring the
screams of innocent people. The real problem is that those
countries

attempt to exploit humanitarian

crises, conflicts

and civil wars instead of preventing them.
Anyone would certainly appreciate that the attacks in Europe were hardly surprising. No country in the world can be
fully safe at a time when violence is so widespread and so
many people support or sympathize with violent groups. We
cannot talk about the safety of any nation or city while the international community ignores (and even supports) the massacres of dozens of innocent people in the Islamic world every
day. The world speaks up when an act of terrorism takes place
in Paris. They speak up when there is an attack in Brussels.
Yet, the West keeps silent when innocent people are killed in
Lahore, Kabul, Ankara, Baghdad, Istanbul or Diyarbakir. We
have witnessed the dishonesty of politics around the world.
These nations, which claim to be sensitive about terrorism,

not to mention human rights organizations and the media,
pay attention — even if the separatist organization publicly
claims responsibility for terrorist attacks.

Approximately 2,500 people, mostly women and children,
were killed in Gaza in 2014 alone. The United Nations did

88

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

not react. The European Union ignored what happened. Un-

fortunately, humanity opted for silence against state terrorism
and child murderers. The prime minister of Israel, the country that massacred the 2,500 people in 2014, attended the

anti-terror march in Paris without an ounce of shame. That
is not counterterrorism. That is not

a common

stand against

terrorism. That is not a common approach.
In a globalizing world, which increasingly resembles

a

large village, no one can afford to turn a blind eye to the problems of others. Suffering has no skin color. Problems won't
just go away when we ignore them. If we want peace, we must
turn our attention to crisis-plagued and conflict-ridden places

— instead of looking inside. Those regions, where crises occur,
have the potential to shake all parts of the world — not just
nearby places. Of course, most importantly, tragedies unfold

in those places, to which humanity, especially those people
with a heart and a conscience, ought to pay attention.

Terrorism does not come from terrorist organizations alone.
Acts of state terrorism, too, take place in front of the international community’s eyes. International organizations and many

countries did not care about the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Syrians or the displacement of 10 million people. There

is virtually no difference between what happened in Bosnia, a
quarter-century ago, and what we have witnessed in Syria for
the last nine years. The same things are happening there. We

face the same tragedy and the same pain. Nothing has changed.
There is no difference either between the double standards that

89

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

the Bosnians and the Syrians encountered. The same people,
who ignored the savagery in Bosnia, now turn a blind eye to the
Rakhine State. Indeed, thousands of poor Muslims from the Rakhine State, who faced violence and whose homes were burned
down, continue to fight for survival under dire circumstances,
in neighboring countries or amid ocean waves today.
The same people who remained silent on the genocide in
Srebrenica, Bosnia also ignore the genocides in Aleppo, Hama
and Ghouta today. Those, who did not speak up against the

brutal killing of women and children back then, do the same
thing regarding the acts of terrorism in Myanmar. The folks,
who enabled the killers then, are arming terrorist groups now.

Human rights, democracy, free will and freedoms were seen
as a luxury for the Bosnians back then. Today, Syrians, Palestinians and Libyans are treated the same way.
Eighty countries from around the world, thousands

of

whose citizens were snatched by the terrorist organization
Daesh, have paid the price for the international community’s
failure to stop state terrorism in Syria — not just the citizens of

that country or its neighbors. The entire world feels the impact of tensions caused by Iraq’s previous government, which
had sectarian and exclusionary tendencies. Each bullet fired
at the thousands of people who tried to defend their political

will in Egypt’s public squares was an attack on legitimate politics, democracy, human rights and liberties around the globe.

Except for a handful of countries, such as Turkey and Qatar, no nation or international organization seriously cares
90

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

about finding a lasting solution to the crisis in Syria. Likewise, the world does not care about finding lasting and comprehensive solutions in Iraq. Nobody cares about the slain

children. No party worries about the women who are killed
or tortured. No one cares that the future of the region and its
population are being destroyed.
The Western world also opted for silence in response to the
most serious allegations of torture in history. The entire world

watched from afar what took place in Guantanamo and other
prisons. The oppressors and the oppressed may change, but
the same people are always watching from the sidelines. The
truth is that Europe died in Bosnia and was buried in Syria.

Just as the West watched the tragedy of the East on television, the East, too, watches the West’s lack of response. That the

West does not react to the plight of people in the East inflicts

deep wounds in their conscience and severely weakens people’s
sense of justice. It would be extremely misleading to associate
the suffering of the East with its residents and their cultures or
civilizations. In truth, the East did not create the current cir-

cumstances by itself. The people who lived in the East today
are no more responsible for unfolding tragedies there than the
countries that meddled in their affairs from the outside.

The double standards that inform the West’s attitude toward the Middle East deeply hurt people’s conscience and
result in damage, whose impact will last for many years. That
damage will only worsen in the Middle East and elsewhere

unless the double standards are abolished and global justice
91

& 6

At a time when the world seems
devoid of compassion, we must be
the champions of mercy and the
voice of people’s conscience.

is promoted. The Western world won’t be able to distance itself from that destruction either.
At a time when the world seems devoid of compassion, we

must be the champions of mercy and the voice of people’s conscience. That must distinguish us from others. Western countries are much more advanced in terms of wealth and welfare.

A quick look at Africa, Asia and South America reveals

a completely different picture. The West built a prosperous

order at the expense of the tears, blood, labor and natural resources that belonged to hundreds of millions of people there.
We cannot, and will not, generate welfare by exploiting poor,

aggrieved, victimized, impoverished and oppressed peoples.
That would go against our faith, our culture and our history.

ISLAMOPHOBIA
Like international terrorism, Islamophobia has emerged as a
major global security threat. That threat may further escalate
due to the international community’s silence regarding Islamophobia. As such, the United Nations must raise awareness

about Islamophobia. To ignore the problem any longer may
create a fresh wave of terrorism, which we may find difficult to
contain, in the future. What came to be known as Islamophobia

cannot be reduced to a psychological reaction to fear. Instead,

what we encounter is hostility and opposition to Islam.
Islamophobia, or anti-Muslim sentiment, emerged in the

West after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the
93

A

FAIRER

WORLD

1S

POSSIBLE

United States and continues to become more influential. In
primarily European countries, where Muslims constitute a
minority, we have witnessed an increase in prejudiced, negative and exclusionary approaches to the Muslim community. |
The increasing rigidity of anti-immigrant sentiment, in turn,

serves to worsen the unfolding humanitarian tragedy. Failing

to address economic and political crises, some Western politicians portray immigrants as the main cause of security issues,

unemployment, crime, poverty and other social problems. Po-

litical parties view the exploitation of the issue as a lifeline
instead of looking for real ways to overcome challenges and,
as a result, have gained popularity in national politics. This is
a source of deep concern. Obviously, this dangerous trend is
rooted in attempts to associate terrorism with Islam — a trend
that reached very serious levels after September 11, 2001.

Unfortunately,

the economic

and social problems

that

Western societies encountered have damaged their fabric.
Neither xenophobia nor any hostility toward people with
different religious opinions or sentiments is remotely acceptable. Acts of provocation by politicians who promote hostility
toward migrants have a direct impact on the Turkish community in Europe. The attempts by certain people, who are (or
want to be) part of world politics, to exclude Muslims from
their countries speaks volumes about their approach to humanity and human beings.
That hostility and opposition manifest themselves in four

ways. Terrorism is the most dangerous strain of Islamophobia.
94

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

In recent years, acts of terrorism targeted Muslims in Europe,

the United States and Asia. Those attacks were motivated by
hatred toward Islam and Muslims. There was a major uptick

in the number of terrorist attacks against Muslims during the
same period. In 2019, the Christchurch attack in New Zealand
revealed the full extent of hatred toward Muslims. Judging by
the assailant’s so-called manifesto, his mindset clearly does
not reflect a personal issue. Likewise, Muslims in the United

States and Europe have been the subject of violence. Attacks
on European mosques have reached a worrying level. Attacks

on Muslim businesses, homes and cultural centers indicate
that Islamophobia and hatred toward Muslims have gone be-

yond the personal level and reached a very dangerous point.
The number

of attacks targeting Muslims

continues to

increase. Hundreds of attacks took place in Germany alone
against mosques and Muslims between 2001, the beginning
of the rise of xenophobia and Islamophobia, and the end of
2020. Turkish citizens in Germany were disproportionately

targeted and victimized by such assaults.
Turkish citizens have fallen victim to racism in Solingen.
Our young children, aged 10 to 12, have perished in Mdlln.
Turkey lost eight of its children just a few years ago in a series
of neo-Nazi terrorist attacks — which some attempted to cover

up by calling them the “doner murders.” We cannot allow

such brutal attacks, which broke our hearts and left a deep
mark on our citizens, to take place again in the future. Hate

crimes continue to worsen, partly due to growing political
95

& G

IsLamophobia, or anti-Muslim
sentiment, emerged in the West
after the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks in the United
States and continues to become
more influential.

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

support. The rise of populist and far-right parties, a’clear and
present danger, in many European democracies is a source of

concern for everyone.
The second aspect of Islamophobia relates to discrimination
against Muslims. Muslims encounter systematic discrimination everywhere, except in their native countries. Their daily routines have become the subject of law enforcement and

intelligence. Their mosques are being surveilled. Their homes
are being searched. Their schools are monitored by the police.
As a country with 6.5 million citizens living in 195 foreign
countries, we are deeply saddened by the fact that xenophobia and Islamophobia have emerged as a source of instability.
Citizens from every member of the Organisation of Islamic

Cooperation, including Turkey, have built lives, studied or
worked abroad.
Even more significant is the rapidly growing population of
Muslims outside their native countries. Today, Muslims con-

stitute 7 percent of the United Kingdom’s population. There
are 44 million Muslims in Europe, whereas the number of
Muslims in the United States has reached approximately 5
million. Globally, Muslim diaspora and minority groups have
a total of 400 million members. The vast majority has lived in
those countries for multiple generations, as opposed to five or

10 years. They lead their lives and believe their future to be
there. Those politicians, who hope to come to power with the
help of illegal organizations, racist gangs, right-wing fanatics
and Islamophobia, are targeting that group, which consists of
hundreds of millions of people. That is a very serious threat.
97

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

Politics constitutes the third dimension of Islamophobia.
Unfortunately, a certain political approach, which takes issue with the presence of Muslims in Europe and aims to send
those people “back” to their native countries from places
where they lived for decades, has been gaining momentum.
Instead of viewing Muslims as an integral part of their culture and society, they seek to alienate and demonize them.
Indeed, the rise of far-right movements

in Europe actively

encourages illegal organizations that subscribe to Islamopho-

bia. Meanwhile, mainstream politicians in Europe have been
trying to win votes by embracing the arguments of extremist
movements. For the record, the Islamophobic political dis-

course and platform exist outside Europe’s borders as well.
Today, we have witnessed the emerging dominance

of an

Islamophobic discourse over political life and practices in
many Asian countries.

The fourth and final component of Islamophobia, in turn, is
the Islamophobia industry. Especially since the 9/11 terrorist
attacks, a global language has started to emerge that attempts
to equate Islam, terrorism, radicalization and extremism. This

extremely offensive language evolved into products sold to
the international community through the media and popular culture. This industry does not just represent a domain of
production and consumption characterized by prejudice. It

is also an area that received significant investment to launch
deliberate campaigns to discredit and alienate Muslims. Eu-

rope’s political elite does not simply disseminate Islamopho-

98

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

bic propaganda with their political statements. At this point,
a new language of communication, in which Muslims them-

selves participate, has already become part of daily life. The
international media, too, takes steps to further worsen the

situation. Insulting the prophet of Islam (PBUH) has become

a tool that the Western media strives to keep on the public
agenda. It is impossible to repair that mindset until insulting
Islam ceases to be a popular tactic. It is necessary to designate
Islamophobia and hatred against Muslims as a crime against

humanity — just like anti-Semitism.
At this point, everyone needs to face the bitter truth: Islamophobia, xenophobia and the far-right are no longer just

political currents. As a matter of fact, those concepts cannot
account for the truth anymore. What we face right now is hostility and opposition to Islam, not to mention hatred toward

Muslims. As such, this matter is no longer just the subject of
politics, civil society or academic research. The threat now requires attention from security forces, statesmen and ordinary

citizens. Going forward, the issue must be one of the primary
questions of global governance.
Just like Daesh and the PKK, radical anti-Islam organizations
must be treated as terrorist entities. Humanity must combat the
rising Islamophobia today, as it fought anti-Semitism after the
Holocaust. The international community must react to neo-Na-

zi attacks no less vocally than Daesh attacks. After all, all those

organizations represent different sides of the same coin. They
are all parasites that feed off the blood of innocent people.
Ne)

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

Western media outlets, in particular, need to engage in serious self-criticism. Politicians, who pave their way to power by
alienating Muslims and demonizing refugees, must get their act
together. Without further delay, we must take a series of precau-

tions, including legal regulations, heavier penalties, reforming
school curricula and adopting a broader definition of terrorism.
We find it wrong that authorities look into possible links

to terrorism in traffic accidents in London, Paris, Brussels and
Amsterdam; whereas highly organized acts of terrorism are
treated as petty crimes. Downplaying hate crimes serves no

one’s interests. The price of ignoring terrorism, motivated by
Islamophobia, could be very high. Authorities must not bow
to pressure from anti-Muslim politicians who provide logistical support to racist media groups and their neo-Nazi discourse. We have been pushing back against such headlines

for two decades. We will keep speaking the truth today and
tomorrow -— just like we did in the past.

There is no doubt that Western states, first and foremost,
bear responsibility for combating Islamophobia and cultural racism. International organizations, too, ought to take initiative in that regard. Hostility and opposition to Islam also
amount to a question of international security. The United

Nations, too, needs to set and implement a more comprehensive agenda regarding that issue.
However, we, as Muslims, need to take this problem more

seriously as well. After all, this phenomenon places at risk the
lives, property and fundamental rights and liberties of mil-

lions of our brothers and sisters. There are many steps that we
100

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

could take within the framework of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Although Islamophobia was included in that
organization’s 10-year action plan, there has been a lack of

due effort on that front. A strong mechanism to identify, monitor and raise awareness about hate crimes against Muslims

is desperately needed. The OIC has no choice but to adapt to
this asymmetrical threat.
Failure to stem the rise of racist attacks and fanatical move-

ments in Europe will inevitably result in fresh and dangerous
catastrophes. All nations and al! leaders must come to appreciate the threat that this toxic mix of Islamophobia and racism

poses to Europe. Unfortunately, those individuals (especially
young people) who are alienated due to their beliefs, appearance, language or color tend to be much more vulnerable to the

propaganda efforts of terrorist organizations. Everyone must refrain from taking steps with such results. To reverse that trend,
young Europeans and Americans need to obtain objective in-

formation about Turks, Islam, Muslims and migrants. We need
to address this problem and take a common stand.
It is necessary to acknowledge that Islamophobic, xenophobic and racist reactions worsen the problem. Associating
terrorism with any religion, nation or region is unacceptable

and inexcusable. It is wrong to cast doubt on the followers of
any faith due to the identity of terrorists and to compel them
to defend themselves — as if they had committed a crime. No
one can talk about Islam and terrorism together — wherever and
from where they may be. Nor can they use Islam as an adjective

to describe terrorism. No one has the right to do such things.
101

THE UN’S PROBLEM
EFFECTIVENESS

OF FUNCTIONALITY

AND

The dilemmas of the UN-centered global system are not limited
to problems rooted in international terrorism. The UN’s prob-

lem of functionality and effectiveness results in the emergence
of an even deeper problem of global governance. That dilem-

ma makes the United Nations less effective in promoting justice and eliminates its primary function. The UN, which was
supposed to promote global justice and be a fair organization,
never became a fair international organization. That shortage
of fairness largely deprived that organization of its functions.

We are faced today with global problems in all corners of the
world. Unfortunately, the United Nations is in no shape to find
solutions to those problems. Instead, the organization has become a shell of itself, unable to act due to conflicts of interests
and competition among the five permanent members. Therefore, the UN causes pressing problems to deepen — instead of

addressing those issues that undermine global stability.
We must, however,

develop global solutions to global

problems. We cannot simply give up on the United Nations.

The UN needs to play an active role in the solution of global
problems in a fair and just manner. Hence the need to expedite reform efforts. One of the main reasons behind the organization’s inability to solve problems is the veto power that the
Security Council’s permanent members exercise. That privi-

lege not only limits the UN’s ability to act but also fails to facilitate the resolution of disagreements through negotiations.
102

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

It is therefore necessary to abolish the veto powers. No one
has the right to leave the entire world to the whims of five nations. There can be no peace in a world where “might makes

right.” We must make the UN system fairer to ensure that it
can function properly.
The first source of the problem of functionality and effectiveness is the continued presence of a structure within the
United Nations that does not match the realities of the inter-

national system. The global system underwent certain changes, and the UN needs to reflect them. We were all born into
a bipolar world. As students and young people, we watched
those two

sides fight in various

continents,

countries

and

areas. There were times when the world found itself on the

verge of a nuclear war, which could have resulted in a great
catastrophe. We witnessed the treatment of world politics as
a zero-sum game, ruthless proxy wars intended to expand

spheres of influence, and destructive, exhausting and unnecessary power struggles. When the Cold War ended and many
nations regained their independence, we rejoiced together.

Today, the situation is very different from five decades, a
quarter-century or even 10 years ago.

Although certain issues attract more attention from time to
time, on a regional basis, there are major challenges that all
nations face collectively. Some of those challenges are rooted
in the still ongoing post-Cold War transformation. Others re-

flect the lack of a new equilibrium resulting from the global
economy’s center of gravity shifting toward the Asia-Pacific
103

A

PAIRER

WORLD

I'S

PO'S'SI BILE

region. Yet other questions include economic uncertainty, in-

come inequality, poverty, environmental issues, youth unem‘ployment, epidemics and social exclusion. Furthermore, those
problems give rise to additional challenges, such as irregular
migration, terrorism, racism and xenophobia. No country has
the luxury of ignoring these problems because they are not
directly affected. Every nation has a moral and conscientious
obligation to contribute to the work of regional and international organizations and to look for solutions. Yet those mechanisms, which were established to solve problems, ended up
creating problems due to their inability to adapt to changing
circumstances. At a time when everything changes radically, it is inevitable for the current “security architecture” and

“foreign policy paradigm” to change as well. The status quo, a
remnant of the bipolar order that still survives within the confines of the UN Security Council, cannot meet contemporary

needs. From humanitarian interventions to the fight against
asymmetrical threats, such as terrorism, we continue to expe-

rience a deadlock caused by those structures.

Another source of the UN’s problem of functionality and
effectiveness is the organization’s inability to pay attention to
pressing problems as needed. In recent years, we have wit-

nessed wars, acts of terrorism, financial crises and natural
disasters inflicting serious wounds. The United Nations could
not come up with a preventive plan regarding any of those is-

sues. The UN cannot act whenever the Security Council’s permanent members fail to take a common stand in response to

104

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

challenges. Indeed, the problems in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya,
Syria, the Rakhine State and Nigeria have all deepened right
in front of our eyes due to disagreements among the Security

Council’s members. There was more and more bloodshed in

the end. The current global system, which was created after
World War I and consolidated during the Cold War, failed
to satisfy any party except a small minority, whose interests

have been safeguarded from the start.
The United Nations grows less effective every passing day.
In the face of major crises, it bows to the carelessness of permanent members. The situation in Syria is a case in point.

The UN’s reputation has been tarnished for the sake of the national interest of a handful of countries. That injustice entails

the dysfunctionality of the UN system.
We must all grasp that the current order is no longer
sustainable.

We

will either succumb

to pessimism

or do

everything in our power to find a fair and sustainable solu-

tion. For the record, we have no intention of giving up. Hence
our motto: “The world is bigger than five.” That is why we
support comprehensive change.

We witness that the United Nations becomes less and less

effective in the face of all problems that affect us — including
crises in our neighborhood. It is no secret that the organiza-

tion was not effective enough in many crises, starting with
Syria. Moreover, the United Nations and its Security Council
have adopted nearly 150 resolutions against Israel to date —
none of which have been properly implemented. If we do not
105

© ie The mechanisms, which were
intended to solve problems, ended

up generating problems themselves
due to their inability to address the
need for change.

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

implement our joint decisions and the UN reacts differently
to similar situations, how could we talk about justice? For

those reasons, it has become an unavoidable obligation to restructure the United Nations in a way that enables the organization to deal with crises more effectively.
An unfair system is also unsustainable. No organization

that places the interests of powerful nations above the rights
of the oppressed can promote safety or stability. Had the international community, starting with the UN Security Coun-

cil, adopted an uncompromising position on Syria, could the
regime have dared to carry out chemical attacks? Does not
Bashar Assad’s regime keep killing Syrian citizens, without
care, because it got away with its past crimes? Would terrorist

attacks have taken place in the heart of Europe if there had
been’ adequate cooperation regarding foreign terrorist fighters? Had the international community adopted a principled
position and refused to make a distinction among terrorist

groups, could those murderers have been empowered to this
extent? Would millions of people have suffered from drought
this year if the international community had followed Turkey’s suit in 2011 and addressed that problem in Somalia?

We all know the answers to these questions perfectly well.
The double standards we encounter regarding those crucial
matters, which affect our security, future and human lives,

break everyone’s hearts.
It is necessary to finally grasp the following facts. We will
either update existing mechanisms or watch the virus of pes107

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

simism take over our bodies. We will either listen more close-

ly to the demands and recommendations of new players or
keep resuscitating a system that produces deadlocks. We will
either manage the wind cf change, blowing from the bottom,
or wait for that wind to turn into a storm and destroy us all.
Those are the options on the table — loud and clear.

There is no doubt that we have what it takes to reverse
this negative situation and to turn the crisis into an opportu-

nity. We can start a different process by replacing destructive
competition with cooperation, conflict with solidarity, and
tensions with reconciliation. None of us are fully immune to
problems that occur in other regions or countries — no matter
how far we may be.
We must fight together against all threats targeting humanity’s peace of mind — from terrorist organizations and drug

traffickers to fraudsters and breakers of the law. The order
ceases to be sustainable if some nations keep all opportunities
and leave the rest with nothing but burdens. In this sense, the
current world order is unsustainable. In a way, the United
Nations and other international organizations have unfortu-

nately failed to defend the rights of oppressed people. Without further delay, we must take the necessary steps to reform

and restructure them.
Genuine cooperation within the UN framework is the most

effective way of reversing this negative situation. We need to
develop a fresh perspective for the sake of world peace. No

crisis resolves itself. No threat simply vanishes because we
108

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

ignore it. If the Western nations do not crack down on xenophobia, racism and Islamophobia, crisis-ridden countries do
not decisively combat terrorism and poverty, and we do not

all work together to create cooperation mechanisms, it will
be impossible to enable everyone to live peacefully and in
line with human dignity. We must all shoulder the burden to

make the world a safer and more prosperous place. For that
purpose, humanitarian diplomacy must be placed at the heart
of the United Nations.
The corrupt nature of the balance of power within the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, manifests
itself in crises around the globe. Did the international com-

munity not establish the General Assembly and the Security
Council to deliver justice? Were those bodies not created for

the fair distribution of freedoms?
The Palestinian question shows, most strikingly, that the
United Nations has become

dysfunctional and ineffective.

Israel has managed to get away with decades of oppression
in Palestine. Most recently, the United States recognized Je-

rusalem as the capital of the country and refused to change
its mind despite its isolation at the General Assembly. To
make matters worse, the United States remains in violation of

agreements that it signed in the past. This approach amounts
to a total disregard of the United Nations and its various organs. In this sense, our primary objective is to prevent such

lawlessness. We are committed to revealing the true nature of
the nations that break the law. We are not pessimistic about
109

A

FAIRER

WORED

I'S

POSSIBEE

the solution to pressing problems. We cannot leave the entire
world to the whims of a single member of the Security Council. The UN could rectify its structural problems if it were
determined and sincere. The European Union, too, could ac-

complish that goal if it opted to play a more active role outside its borders. Rest assured, even individuals and nations
could solve many problems by paying attention to unfolding

tragedies and speaking out against them. We do not despair.
We refuse to be hopeless.
Regarding the recognition of Palestine as a state, only eight

countries sided with the United States. The General Assem-

bly overwhelmingly recognized the State of Palestine. That
country, however, continued to be targeted by bombs. The
residents of Gaza continue to live in an open-air prison. Not

even a single case of tomatoes can be delivered there without Israel’s permission. This humanitarian crisis unfolding in
front of the world’s eyes cannot be ended.
There can be no peace and stability in our region until the

Palestinian question is resolved fairly. To accomplish that goal,
international law and earlier decisions must be respected. No

one and no country are above the law. Nor could they be. Yet
“might makes right” when it comes to the Palestinian question has ruled for many years. Emboldened by the support of
certain powers, Israel has doubled down on its lawlessness. It
sticks to occupation, oppression, violence and the “de-Muslimization” of Jerusalem despite countless resolutions. There is no
difference between Israel’s current practices and the racist and

110

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

discriminatory treatment of Blacks historically in America and,
more recently, in South Africa. There is no room for settlers,

who surround the West Bank like poison ivy and make life
miserable for our Palestinian brothers and sisters, in the realm
of the law. It is not possible to account for the restrictions imposed on Gaza with conscience, justice or humanity.

Where do the Israeli government’s power and recklessness
come from? It is because they know they can get away with massacres, even if they take place in front of the whole world. They
know too well that the international community won’t hold
them accountable for the dismemberment of children’s bodies
by Israeli bombs as they played on the beach. They are also
aware that their practices, which walking all over fundamental

human rights, won’t trigger any sanctions. Indeed, crimes embolden their perpetrators in the absence of a fitting punishment;
hence the increasing severity of Israeli crimes in Palestine. The
quest for peace and stability in the region will be doomed to fail

unless those responsible for murder, massacres and oppression
are held accountable in line with international law.
The U.S. decision regarding Jerusalem was incompatible
with international law, humanity’s moral compass,

justice

and the realities on the ground. Indeed, that decision dealt
the heaviest blow to the UN Security Council, of which the
United States is a permanent member. Specifically, the U.S.
disregarded Resolution 478 (1980), which it also signed. According to that resolution, no country is permitted to open

an embassy in Jerusalem. Needless to say, the UN cannot ex-

A

FAIRER

WORLD

FS

POSSIBLE

pect its member states to find it reputable or credible if the

permanent members of its Security Council do not take into
consideration or respect UN resolutions. No country is above
the law. No nation can count on its might to disregard international law. The United States may be a powerful country in
military terms, yet only the righteous are truly mighty. You
cannot be strong if you are on the wrong side. You cannot act
so recklessly in such a sensitive area and impact the fate of

millions of people.
The circumstances of World War II no longer influence
the world. Heads of state or government tell me, in every single bilateral meeting, that I am right to say that “the world is
bigger than five.” When it comes to acting on that principle,
however, they end up shrouded in silence. For the record,
even the leaders of Muslim countries are yet to grasp the true
meaning of that statement because they have grown accus-

tomed to policies of enslavement. In face-to-face meetings,
Muslim leaders, too, concede that I make an accurate point.
Yet hardly anyone talks about those things when they have
the floor. Unfortunately, no one dares to take concrete steps,
obviously concerned about repercussions. Many leaders and
nations are worried that they could offend other countries by
speaking up. They keep silent out of fear or because it is not
in their interest to speak up.
We will, however, speak! For we cannot promote justice

unless and until we speak our mind. We dream of a world
where being right is being powerful. If the international com-

112

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

munity yearns for the same thing, it cannot allow five countries to decide their fate. We must make necessary plans if
we truly believe that the UN needs to be reformed. That is
certainly an urgent need we cannot postpone any longer.

The speed and financial burden of the UN’s bureaucratic
mechanisms in the area of humanitarian assistance suggest that
that system was established for its own sake — instead of to help
victims. Likewise, that all power rests with the five permanent
members of the Security Council brings the whole system to a
standstill. The UN is nowhere to be seen in many places people
desperately need assistance. Desperately needed operations are
delayed because they place at risk the vested interests of one
of the five permanent members. Oppressive governments are
emboldened by that fact, mounting more and more pressure on
victimis and doubling down on their harmful practices.

This is not the first time that we have encountered those
double standards. We witnessed the same thing in many parts

of the world, from Syria and Iraq to Afghanistan, the Rakhine
State and Africa, where ruthless genocides took place. Tens
of millions of people have been left homeless, displaced or
killed for the sake of others’ convenience. People die and their
lands are confiscated because some fail to make the right de-

cisions or choose to break the rules of their own making.
Over the course of 3.5 years, hundreds of thousands of

people were brutally massacred in the heart of Europe — with

the whole world watching. One of the most shameful genocides in history took place in Srebrenica. A total of 8,372
113

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

civilians, mostly women and children, sought refuge in the
supposedly safe city of Srebrenica before being handed over

to ultranationalist radicals by a group of Dutch soldiers. Did
the West care to speak up against those acts? Absolutely not.
Syria, too, was among the places where the United Nations

was rendered ineffective and dysfunctional. The UN did not
lift a finger as the country became the site of a power struggle
between certain states and terrorist organizations, while hun-

dreds of people lost their lives. Nor does the UN lift a finger
now. The UN was nowhere to be seen or heard in Syria. Today,
over 3 million of the 5.5 million Syrians who fled violence and
persecution remain under our country’s protection. It is not

possible to argue that the United Nations has notably contrib-

uted to making the lives of those asylum seekers a little easier.
We witness the same problematic attitude in Myanmar,

where Muslims from the Rakhine State are suffering a tragedy and a humanitarian crisis. What happened in the Rakhine
State and the rest of Myanmar is no secret. Do all members of

the Islamic world feel the same way about that tragedy? Certainly not. The presidents of Turkey and Iran alone attended
the session at the General Assembly regarding the situation in

Myanmar. Bangladesh and Pakistan were represented by their
prime ministers. The only other high-level representative was
the vice president of Indonesia. Is the plight of Muslims in the
Rakhine State such a simple matter? Is it an issue that states

need to touch with a 10-foot pole? Unfortunately, that appears
to be the case here. The international community has not even
114

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

clearly established the total number of people that lost their
lives as a result of violent attacks in the Rakhine State or while
attempting to escape. We are deeply saddened by the lack of

enthusiasm that plagues international initiatives led by Turkey. The world cannot take so much oppression.
We insist on saying that “the world is bigger than five”

because we refuse to consent to “the law of the jungle.” An
organization in which might prevails over rights cannot possibly promote peace and stability. Fresh tragedies, akin to what
happened in Syria and the Rakhine State, and new genocides,
as in Rwanda and Bosnia, will unfold in other places in the
future as long as the current system remains intact. What we
are experiencing today is the outcome. The real problem rests
with the system itself and the stakeholders that violate the sys-

tem to pursue their own interests. Indeed, our objections are
so heavily criticized because they make some uncomfortable.
The decision regarding Jerusalem set in motion fresh threats

against all of humanity — including the United States and Israel. The remaining problems in our region won’t make us (or the
rest of mankind) forget about the Palestinian question. Such
steps, which violate international

law and hurt everyone’s

conscience, undermine the world’s trust in the international

system and the United Nations. We cannot watch those developments, which impact everyone’s future, from the sidelines.
The lack of trust in international institutions and organizations, starting with the United Nations, undermines humanity’s sense of justice and leaves millions of people without
115

ANIFADRIER

WORLD:

1S

POS SIBLE

hope. That lack of trust is indeed one of the primary sources

of the problem of international terrorism that we encounter
today. Everyone tries to look out for their own interests because the various states, which gather under the UN’s roof
and claim to represent the entire world, cannot find a way
to prevent massacres by terrorist organizations, humanitar-

ian crises or victimization. The double standards, to which
the oppressed are subjected, and the lack of interest in the

killing of children represent a lifeline for terrorism globally.
Terrorist organizations prey on the masses who have given up

on the United Nations and international institutions and are
left without hope or a way out. The world is inching toward a

new storm of chaos and oppression.

THE QUESTION OF INCLUSIVENESS
REPRESENTATION

AND

The UN’s current problems are not limited to dysfunctionality and ineffectiveness. One of the main challenges that the
organization faces is its shortage of inclusiveness. In this regard, the United Nations falls short of accurately reflecting

the realities of the international system today. That situation,
in turn, entails a deep crisis of representation. Hence the need
to reach the broadest possible consensus on a reform plan to
make the Security Council more representative, more demo-

cratic, fairer, more transparent and more accountable. After
all, the Security Council’s inability to reflect the international

116

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

system’s political realities is among the first areas where the

question of inclusiveness manifests itself.
The world is no longer governed by a unipolar system,
where a single country effectively controls the international
system entirely. The current situation is unlike the aftermath
of World War II, when states formed clusters around two great
powers, or the post-Cold War period, when the world was

under the influence of a single nation. In this day and age,
the international system is shaped by a balance of power, in
which a multitude of states participate. At this point, we have
witnessed rapid progress toward multipolarity. Yet the United Nations treats international politics as an area controlled
by five countries alone. That is completely wrong. Those five
nations do not exert the most influence over world politics

anymore.

Some

other states, in turn, have more influence

than certain members of the Security Council. Where do the
rising military, economic

and diplomatic powers fit in the

United Nations? How does the organization intend to meet

their demands? How does it hope to resolve any problem that
involves those nations? That is why the UN cannot be effective until it stops disregarding the current balance of power.

The balance of power is not the only dimension of the
shortage of inclusiveness.

The United Nations also lacks

inclusiveness in terms of accurately reflecting global demo-

graphics. In this regard, it is necessary to restructure the Security Council by considering the geographical and religious

distribution of the global population. We must rethink the
117

G 4

No one has the right to leave
humanity at the whims of five
countries. Instead, we must see
and show that the entire world
and all the nations have a say on
the platform.

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

distinction between permanent and temporary members. Becoming a temporary member of the Security Council often
means absolutely nothing. It does not remotely address the
questions of inclusiveness and representation. The entire decision-making process comes to a standstill if even one of the
five permanent members

disagrees with a given resolution.

The world is not at the mercy of the United States, Russia,
China, France and the United Kingdom. A body with five
permanent members from three continents, which emerged
after World War IJ, cannot govern the world. That kind of
organization cannot be inclusive. No one has the right to
leave humanity at the whims of five countries. Instead, we
must see and show that the entire world and all the nations
have a say on the platform. That the United Nations, which
has close to 200 members, makes decisions according to the
wishes of the Security Council’s five permanent members is
inexplicable. That kind of place cannot be described as a free
or democratic world.
Moreover, the UN suffers from a problem of representation in terms of religious communities. The lack of fair representation in global decision-making and implementation
mechanisms, too, is a source of grave concern for Muslims.
For example, there is no Muslim nation among the Security

Council’s permanent members — even though Muslims constitute a significant part of the global population. Today, the

Security Council’s permanent members, rather than Muslim
countries, make decisions about Iran, Iraq, Palestine or, espe-

119

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

cially, Syria. Any one of those five nations can veto the right

decisions and bring the whole process to a standstill.
The inclusion of Muslims, Christians, Jews and Buddhists

in decision-making processes could facilitate fairer decisions.
The current structure, however,

offers no justice in terms

of religious representation. The UN could become a more
inclusive organization if the number of members was to be
increased to 15 or 25. Those countries ought to take turns

every other year or two years. Through constant change, all
193 member states should have the right to become members
of the Security Council. Each nation should be able to have its

say on how the world is governed.
Of course, the United Nations will remain the sole platform
with authority for promoting international solidarity, peace and
security as well as the resolution of global problems. Yet an organization, which stands idly by as one of the greatest tragedies
of all time unfolds in Syria, certainly fails to live up to its responsibilities toward humanity. There is no justice here if Cuba
still faces an embargo despite the objection of 138 member

states. There is no justice here if the UN keeps silent as Israel
bombs Gaza and massacres thousands of women and children.
The legitimacy of an international system that proves unable to prevent political disputes or social and economic cri-

ses will come under scrutiny sooner or later. The champions
of the international system who control all decision-making
processes can no longer expect other nations to assume due
responsibility.
120

THE

QUESTION

OF GLOBAL

GOVERNANCE

Unfortunately, the United Nations is not the only problem with
the global system. The UN is a key part of global governance.

Yet the rest of the international organizations cannot contribute
adequately to promoting good global governance either. The
problems that the UN encounters occur in other international
organizations as well. At this point, injustice and dysfunctionality have become the most visible attributes of those organizations. Almost all institutions established in the name of coop-

eration are either ineffective at preventing crises or complicit
in the deepening of crises. To make matters worse, hypocrisy,
which we often encounter in international politics, also manifests itself within those organizations, hence our emphasis on

justice.as a step toward global peace and stability.
Global governance has three main pillars. The first pillar is

politics, whereas the second is security. The UN is obviously
a political organization, yet it also pioneers efforts to promote
international peace and security. International organizations

that specialize in security, too, have faced serious challenges
vis-a-vis security governance. The third pillar of global governance, in turn, is related to the economy. The challenges that the
global economy faces today are quite obvious. We must make
the global economy fairer. Could anyone seriously think that

an economic order in which the rich get wealthier and the poor
are further impoverished and exploited could promote justice?

NATO, in turn, comes to mind concerning global security governance. Turkey cares deeply about NATO’s open-door
121

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

policy and advocates its deterrence. We also expect the organization, to which we have provided all kinds of support in its
fight against terrorism for many years, to support Turkey. Un-

fortunately, we are saddened by NATO’s gradual weakening
due to a lack of cooperation between its member states. Likewise, a quick look at the ongoing discussion within the NATO
framework reveals that security problems are unlikely to be

resolved fairly. Some member states harshly criticize NATO;
whereas others openly threaten their NATO allies. To what
extent could we overcome security crises under those circum-

stances? As such, we face the ineffectiveness of the United
Nations and, at the same time, witness serious disagreements

within security and defense organizations such as NATO.
As an organization, NATO

successfully survived in the

post-Cold War period, despite pessimistic projections. In this

regard, it demonstrated its central position in the defense of
all member states. Indeed, the principle of collective defense
is the backbone

of the organization.

Going forward, NATO

can maintain a high level of deterrence and make significant
contributions to the defense of its member states — not to men-

tion international peace and stability — provided that it can
continue to operate based on that principle. Today, NATO

has the chance to become a key organization in addressing
cross-nation threats. After all, the new kinds of threats, which
inherently have a global impact, make clear the importance

of cooperation among many players. We maintain that NATO
has a major responsibility, especially in the fight against in-

122

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

ternational terrorism. Therefore, we believe collective defense

and deterrent principles are needed more than ever.
An alliance, which survived and became institutionalized,
is highly likely to carry out similar functions in the future.
Yet, the recent erosion of the international system and international organizations has, unfortunately, taken a toll on
NATO as well. The organization’s members often experience
serious disagreements over financial contributions and oth-

er matters. The disagreements could potentially chip away at

NATO’s very identity. In truth, there is a need for genuine
and active cooperation against the most pressing problems,

starting with terrorism.
The European Union, too, feels the impact of that same
process. The organization faces a very serious challenge to-

day. Turning its back on the same values it advocated for
years, the EU has fallen short of expectations in many areas,
including the fight against terrorism and the refugee crisis.
The current state of affairs is completely different than the
1990s or the early 2000s. The union neither defends its values, which it claims to uphold, nor shows any interest in promoting them. The member states and their citizens no longer

have high expectations from the European Union. As Brexit
demonstrated, they complain much more publicly about the
organization. In this new era, we witnessed tensions escalat-

ing among EU members. Indeed, the idea of Europe is drifting

toward collapse. The organization cannot, and will not, take
sufficient initiative regarding any issue. It bows to reactionary
1123}

& &

Humanity cannot reach its economic
goals in the absence of peace and
confidence on a global scale.

DOUBLE STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

nationalism and xenophobia. Racism and Islamophobia now
put the European Union’s future at risk. Problems like migra-

tion and terrorism knock on Europe’s door, yet the EU still

lacks a comprehensive plan to deal with such security threats
and fails to genuinely strive for cooperation.
The question of global governance is not limited to security and political organizations. Economic and financial institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund and the G-20,

suffer from similar problems. The IMF must cease to manage
the financial and political structures of many countries. Although the G-20 appears to play a more prominent role than
some other international organizations, it must stop looking like
a “rich nations club” to the outside world. Global problems call

for global solutions. In this regard, I am pleased to witness that a
common vision is emerging on the G-20 platform every passing

year. At a time when each economic development affects the
entire world, it is extremely important to embrace that kind of
approach. We can solve problems more easily by supporting ef-

forts by various countries to overcome challenges through close
cooperation or to play as a team. Needless to say, the G-20 cannot become as influential as it wants if it serves as a platform for
economic cooperation alone. At the same time, we must ensure

that the organization contributes to global peace and stability.
After all, humanity cannot reach its economic goals in the absence of peace and confidence on a global scale.
In this regard, the G-20 has the power to directly impact the
life of every single individual through its decisions and atti-

125

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

tude. We act with that awareness in mind — and we are obliged
to do so. The G-20 is not a rich nations club. We represent

societies with a certain level of welfare, as well as countries
that are still developing. As the representatives of the world’s
leading developed and rising nations, we appreciate the circumstances of low-income and developing countries, as well.

As such, we need to have something to tell them. The economic development of low-income nations is an important issue.

We need to ensure that this organization, which was designed
to promote global economic stability, changes its old ways and
works differently to get results. We must stand in solidarity

when it comes to investments so that those investments lead
to certain results. Applicability must be our top priority. We
must accomplish that goal. We ought to take more responsibility in dealing with humanity’s pressing problems, including

underdevelopment and income inequality. Such an approach
to global governance cannot succeed unless we manage the

UN’s restructuring process more effectively.
For the record, the problems with global governance are not

limited to global institutions alone. The Islamic world, too, suffers from questions of governance. Despite the West’s double
standards, Muslim nations still experience very serious problems in their attempts to promote cooperation among themselves. The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, too, needs to

play a more active role to address the problems of Muslims.
Provided that the world is governed by an unfair order and
Muslims

126

suffer disproportionately from it, Muslim

nations

DOUBLE

STANDARDS

IN INTERNATIONAL

POLITICS AND THE NEED FOR A UN REFORM

need to address those problems with their own resources. Any
attempt to look for solutions elsewhere gives rise to dozens of

new problems as aresult of internal conflicts of interest.
In light of the above assessment, it is necessary to agree

that reforming the UN is a vital issue. At a time when world
politics is going through such a dynamic process, we must

understand we will face greater challenges that will be more
difficult to contain if we keep ignoring our common problems. We must make the United Nations more effective, more
authoritative and truly representative. Only by restructuring
the organization can we overcome the major challenges we

currently face. It is never too late for reforms. There is still a

major opportunity that we can seize. What matters is to establish what kind of UN we want and to develop an applicable
model for reform. Most importantly, we must show our will to
reform. Only then can we start hoping for change.

127

,
a eneDale ih~ rm ret
ite

mateswee
y sewn .

vb Ersasuonieteeas 3 a

aee

se

aun

IR ea et

ogiruh KatoGo ementeanh ainibh fies

- wig Shits
iinet WstinigionA dion Adesneon‘intric
ona!

on ihaty ist unyill aan oe pa adi cage be juin bd sata
‘saad
hina ean elites sage Hoe veh apr

«AR ecg pita

git Dein erage Wan. aispeti

: byCth ts 44 tify ow ve {hina
aL

seas tae

heh

MN

ee

onl

mn
li

: af
:

i

ee

i

‘

fi

gi z

gal

a vhiier-s

ai

A party ‘ot

or ‘a
mie
LenaptheMb ete,
ie be
~

“Ml nn

‘ye
iW

‘iphte

ayeery Ve siaiailiayli
gs

Ae

ta pipet jati
Y fad“
jaye

j

: Wr 7

eu

PART II

A United Nations Reform

At a time when the entire global system is being transformed,
it is a vitally important matter to restructure the United Nations, to make

it more

active, more

deterrent

and better

equipped to promote global justice by restoring its authority.
The global system stands on the brink of comprehensive
change. A unipolar international order suddenly emerged fol-

lowing the disintegration of the Soviet Union. That unipolar
order could neither deliver justice nor promote stability on
a global scale. In response to the al-Qaida terrorist organiza-

129

ieie The UN reform must entail an
overhaul of all economic, political
and cultural dynamics.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

tion’s inhumane attacks in September 2001, Washington carried out military interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq. That
war on terror, which relied on military means, ended up creating a fertile ground for terrorism, resulting in new terrorist
organizations taking root and further eroding the possibility
of global peace and stability. It left behind utterly unmanageable chaos. The international community faces today a crisis

that stems from the said chaos.
Humanity finds itself at a crossroads today. We will either adopt a new approach, which will restore global justice,
peace and stability, or go with the current global flow and
drown. Needless to say, no single country can swim against
that current unilaterally. To think that isolation will move
anyone away from pressing problems would be a huge mis-

take. At the end of the day, the various issues that destabilize
the global system threaten all of humanity. Challenges like
international terrorism, irregular migration, starvation, fam-

ine, climate change and the global pandemic will knock on
everyone’s door someday -— if they have not already. As such,

we must develop a new approach to global governance. It is

possible to build a new world, informed by a new mindset
with a commitment to fairness, equality and responsible conduct, equipped with effective problem-solving mechanisms
and focused on humanity’s shared (rather than strictly national) interests. The precondition of building that world is to
restructure the global governance architecture. What we need

is a new world order whereby all components of the glob-

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

al governance architecture, from security and politics to the
economy and health care, must be rebuilt in a more effective

and more resilient fashion.
The unipolar world has ceased to exist.

A new world is be-

ing born. A multitude of major powers coexists in that multipolar world, where power is distributed on a global scale. Any
attempt to oppose that trend is to stand against the flow of history. It is tantamount to rowing against the current. As such,
we must build a new order in sync with the realities of the new
world. In this regard, the United Nations has a great responsibility. We must take into consideration the new realities of

the world as we restructure the UN. It is not futile to dream of
building a more active, more representative, more transparent

and more accountable UN with restored authority.
A mental transformation is needed, first and foremost, to
rebuild the UN with an eye on this new world order. We cannot leave world politics at the whim of five nations. We must

subscribe to the core principle that the world is bigger than

five. After all, the global system cannot be left to the interests,
ambitions and caprices of five countries. The UN is a global
institution and it must be at the heart of any effort to solve

global problems. Unfortunately, the organization, established
in the name of peace and justice, has failed to address humanity’s pressing problems due to the inherent flaws of its
design. Given the current state of world politics, it is neither
possible nor right for the UN to operate as it is. Humanity is

faced with a brand new reality. Failure to adapt to those new
132

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

realities would deprive the UN of its legitimacy, authority and

its ability to contribute to global peace and stability.
Indeed, the UN was established 76 years ago in the immediate aftermath of the greatest tragedy in world history to pro-

mote fairness and become functional. To date, it has succeeded in a handful of areas. Unfortunately, it seems to become

more and more unfair and dysfunctional today. The number
of member states increased from 51 to 193. The world’s economic center of gravity has shifted. The changing balance of
military, economic and diplomatic power gives rise to a new
global order. That trend suggests that the Eurocentric geopolitical order of the 19 and 20" centuries is heading East. In

other words, the global order ceases to be centered around the
West. Against the backdrop of those developments, preserv-

ing the UN in its current state threatens to be incompatible
with the geopolitical, geoeconomic and geocultural realities

of this new era. Indeed, there is a highly dynamic world in all
three areas, which happen to be interrelated. Any crisis in one

area directly undermines stability in other areas.
The UN reform must entail an overhaul of all economic,
political and cultural dynamics. After all, world politics remains highly dynamic in all three areas. As the international
order evolves from unipolarity to multipolarity, the powers
that lay claim to global roles and view themselves as the sole

representatives of universal values worsen the international
system’s shortcomings rather than fixing them. They make
more rigid policy choices just to perpetuate their global reign.

133

A

FAIRER

WORRIED?

IS >Pi0'S/S IBLE

In doing so, they place their own interests before everything

else. They absolutely do not respect the values or interests of
others. Under the circumstances, one can only dream about
promoting sustainable stability. To make matters worse, those

powers end up complaining about instability. The global system suffers from countless problems. Growing tensions between states, rooted in the emerging power vacuum

in the

international arena, were the latest addition to that long list.
Protectionism, extreme and reactionary nationalism, and ex-

clusion have been on the rise. Right now, the world resembles

1939 more closely than 1945. Peace and stability must be pur-

sued urgently. Despite its shortcomings, the UN remains the
most suitable platform for that pursuit.
Hence the prominence of a UN reform in the global political agenda. Humanity will either reform the UN, truly and
sincerely, to develop sustainable solutions to global problems
or end up having to go back to the beginning after witnessing
great tragedies. As such, world leaders have a responsibility

to adopt a preventive approach before it is too late. To prevent
great catastrophes and allow future generations to inherit a
fairer and sustainable world, we must adapt our collective security institutions to the world’s new realities.

The international community has been talking about reform
for many years. There have been countless official and semi-official meetings regarding the issue. We have exchanged views

on competing models for reform and discussed a multitude of issues within those frameworks. Unfortunately, there has been no
134

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

progress to date — nor does progress seem likely now. Quite the
contrary, every single debate ended due to the narrowly defined
national interests of member states. The prospect of change
has been trapped in lengthy and complex processes. Instead
of focusing on urgent and strategic matters, the international
community gets bogged down in secondary issues. Everything
is reduced to the ideas of concession and negotiation. The pro-

ceedings create additional details and disagreements because
gradual, as opposed to revolutionary, methods are preferred.
At this point, it is possible to argue that the pursuit of reform, which dates back to the 1990s, has been completely sus-

pended. That is because members of the international community are preoccupied with their own interests and have no
interest in dealing with the problem of global governance. Let
us consider the Coronavirus pandemic, which remains one

of the greatest challenges that the world currently faces. The
only way to address that global public health crisis is to create
a joint governance mechanism and to make it functional.
Instead, the World Health Organization, which was supposed to be the authority, only belatedly designated the Coronavirus infections as a global pandemic. The institution also

failed to urge the international community to take preventive
measures and the necessary steps to raise awareness. This situation alone attested to the existence of a grave problem in
global governance.
Unfortunately, past reform attempts have fallen short of
being comprehensive, principled, solution-oriented and stra135

6 é

The UN must be both attractive
and deterrent from each nation’s
perspective. All member states
ought to believe that they
can defend their rights under
the UN’s roof.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

tegic. If anything, they were treated like a stalling tactic. Any
stakeholder who raised objections was contained within a process that facilitated the voicing of opinions without yielding
results. Today, the reform process is being reduced to country

categories as well as meaningless, lengthy and open-ended
debates. The process disregards certain principles that would
be acceptable for all parties. At the end of the day, the cacophony neither produces a road map nor facilitates progress.
Hence the need to set aside secondary questions in the proceedings to restructure the United Nations. All open-ended
discussions must be eliminated. Member states and groups

of countries should be able to adopt a truly reformist position
with the potential to fundamentally transform the UN system,
instead of concentrating on their narrow interests. They must
prove capable of focusing on strategic objectives. Only then

can it be possible to create a fair and sustainable agenda, liberated from privileges.
The only way to make the United Nations fair and sustain-

able is to ensure that it represents each member state fairly
and reflects the current balance of power in the international

system. In other words, a balance of power, as well as fairness, is needed. To find an effective solution, the international community must finally and sincerely think about the relationship between the General Assembly and the Security
Council. We can neither promote justice nor save the UN un-

less the General Assembly makes the rules and the Security
Council plays an executive role.
iL37

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

The current situation, in which some members of the Security Council exercise permanent and unlimited authority

and cannot be held accountable by the General Assembly, is
simply unsustainable. The Security Council cannot operate

independently of the General Assembly. It must emerge out
of the General Assembly and answer to it. Only then can the
UN contribute to the pursuit of justice and stability. Indeed,
the first strategic step toward redefining the relationship between the General Assembly and the Security Council must

be to confront the veto power as a priority. No reform effort
will succeed in the absence of the veto power’s abolishment.

That is why we must set aside all other issues to focus on
the veto power and to mobilize the international community

around that single question. Instead of wasting our time and
energy on other matters, which will lead us to a dead end, the
only sensible solution is to concentrate on the main issue. If
the international community sincerely intends to reform the
UN system, it must subscribe to the principle that the world is

bigger than five and abolish those privileges.
This proposal is not some idealist pipe dream. Quite the
contrary, it is a highly realistic plan to promote an agenda,

built around the veto power, and to get results based on that
agenda. The vast majority of the UN’s member

states have

shown that they can unite around certain issues — despite all

the divisions, complex agendas and diversions. In this regard,
the idea that the world is bigger than five has the potential to

serve as a point of departure and a springboard for reform.

138

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

One of the most striking examples of that capacity was the
2011 meeting of the Uniting for Consensus group, of which Turkey is a member, in Rome. 120 member states attended that
meeting. Indeed, a two-thirds majority is needed to pass a resolution at the UN General Assembly. If 120 countries from different groups and parts of the world can gather to discuss various
issues, then it is perfectly possible for 130 members to join forces and make decisions regarding an issue that affects them all.

Of course, it is not enough for the UN General Assembly to
pass a resolution with a two-thirds majority due to structural

reasons. A single permanent member of the Security Council

could still veto that decision — thus reducing all that effort to
a total waste. For the record, such a decision is highly likely
to be blocked by the Security Council. That veto, however,
would have serious and real consequences. To shake the system’s foundation and make it come to its senses, indeed, is

what must be done at this point. Blocking a joint decision by
193 member states regarding such a critical issue would have
moral, political and diplomatic consequences. Going forward,
we must take realistic measures to promote justice and make

the UN more functional — instead of fighting over narrow interests vis-a-vis marginal issues or creating fresh privileges.

139

THE

NEED

FOR A REFORM

History teaches us a bitter truth: States tend to be dragged
into war before they come to appreciate the value of peace.
Great catastrophes lead everyone to wise up and search for
something new. Old international organizations and pursuits

of order vanish entirely and make way for new ones. That development has occurred repeatedly over the last couple of centuries. Obviously, it is much better to take action before such
tragedies unfold. The pursuit of peace must take place in times
of peace. It is necessary to use every resource available to man-

kind and to reinforce what is insufficient before it is too late.
Any war is the product of interactions between a minimum of two players. It is never enough for one party alone to
strive for peace. War may be rooted in the irresponsible and
greedy attitude of one side, whereas peace requires a collec-

tive effort. In the absence of a collective stance, there can be
no satisfactory justice nor sustainable stability. Indeed, the

UN was established and preserved to date with an eye on
these goals. However, the organization, in its current state

of non-functionality, emerges as a problem itself — let alone
finding solutions to mankind’s pressing problems. It must,

therefore, be improved and adapted to the world’s current
circumstances immediately.
It is an obligation and no longer a choice to reform international institutions, to meet the expectations of new rising

powers and to ensure that the new order accurately reflects the
current balance of power. Otherwise, the outcome won’t serve
140

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

any party well. Instead of ending up in a situation, from which
no side benefits, the best move is to take action immediately.

International players have been avoiding their responsibil-

ities. All nations, starting with the United States, are creating
a power vacuum in the international system. The various non-

state actors and states that penetrate those pockets attempt to
take advantage of the situation. Such opportunities fuel con-

frontation between various stakeholders on a variety of platforms. Those areas, which all parties view as opportunities, fuel
everyone’s appetite — and give rise to misleading perceptions.

There is fertile ground today in which one of the false
perceptions that predated World War II could take root once
again. A war between multiple states is not a remote possibility, provided that the great powers do not act responsibly or
demonstrate their commitment to upholding peace and jus-

tice. It is far more likely for a war to become a global affair.
Therefore, it is necessary to pursue peace before it is too late.
We must mobilize all relevant players and institutions. Two
fundamental problems need to be solved. Justice and a balance
of power must be restored. For this purpose, we must repair

the UN’s reputation as a first step. In other words, we ought to

adapt the already existing institution to the current conditions.
The UN must be both attractive and deterrent from each
nation’s perspective. All member states ought to believe that
they can defend their rights under the UN’s roof. At the same
time, they must deem the UN capable of defending the rights
of everyone else. Needless to say, the UN’s current structure
141

£ &

Justice is the shared value of
all communities. All social and
political systems, irrespective of
culture, civilization or religion,
have strived to create an order

with justice at its core.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

and mechanisms are not compatible with that goal. Even some
of the Security Council’s permanent members maintain that

the organization is neither fair nor functional. The remaining
nations, in turn, face a much more grim picture. They see that

the UN does not defend their rights properly. Nor do they
think that solutions can be found on the UN platform. Simply
put, we are witnessing the erosion of the UN’s reputation in

the eyes of its members.
The present, not the aftermath of the next war, is the best
time to implement reforms. In truth, this debate is hardly
new. The international community has been talking about
the need to reform the United Nations for decades. Even some

of the UN’s most senior officials have conceded that point,
as multiple studies explored how the organization ought to
be improved. Furthermore, exactly what type of reform each
member state envisions is already out in the open. Over time,

member states formed larger groups, whose proposals engaged

in competition with the ideas of other groups. Although such
efforts date back to the 1990s, it is possible to trace the origins
of discontent with the UN system to earlier periods and even

to the organization’s establishment. At the end of the day, the
United Nations was part of an effort by the victors of World
War II to prepare for the following conflict.
Indeed, the Security Council was divided between the two

parties of the Cold War. The United States and the Soviet Union, together with France, the United Kingdom and China, cre-

ated a polarized order within the council. All remaining nations
143

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

were expected to work within the confines of the ultimately
toothless General Assembly. The static nature of the Cold War,
coupled with the discipline surrounding the bipolar order, led
the international community to ignore initiatives for change.

In the aftermath of the Cold War, in contrast, there was more
room for a lively debate on reform. In 1992, the member states

formed open-ended working groups. The debate regained momentum at the 2005 summit. Secretary-General Kofi Annan ul-

timately proposed two models, yet those proposals amounted
to nothing more than ambitions and empty words. The reform
process, which gained momentum

anew in 2008, appears to

have been suspended in 2013. Nowadays, it is almost completely forgotten — just when the world needs it most. After all,
international law and rules are still being violated today.
It would not be an exaggeration to say no real steps were
taken during the entire period. After all, all permanent members of the Security Council, starting with the United States,
reduced their expectations from the United Nations. They
did not live up to their responsibilities within the UN framework either. In 2003, the United States dealt a heavy blow to

the UN and its mission for peace by taking unilateral action
against Iraq upon realizing that the UN was not going to do
its bidding. The remaining permanent members, too, had no

problem exercising their veto power only in line with their

own national interests.
Furthermore, the expected expansion of the Security Council turned out to be a futile dream for candidate states. Where-

144

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

as countries like Germany, Japan, Brazil and India engaged

the question of reform with an eye on their membership,
other nations, such as Italy, South Korea, Argentina and Pakistan, noted that any potential expansion must not exclude

themselves. The members of all groups defended their own
group’s interests as the members of each region looked out for
their own region’s interests. The permanent five members, in
turn, held onto their privileges within the Security Council

by citing that deadlock. The real problem, however, was the
General Assembly’s gradual weakening during that period.
A series of procedural regulations, implemented
name

of improvement,

Assembly.

However,

in the

appeared to strengthen the General

the General Assembly evolved into a

body that was excluded from the decision-making process
at critical times. For example, the U.S. decision to recognize

Jerusalem as the capital of Israel was condemned by the General Assembly in a 128-9 decision. Yet, the United States had
no problem ignoring that resolution. For the record, this is not

just about the United States. No permanent member refrains
from acting similarly when their interests are at risk. For ex-

ample, a quick look at the UN’s history reveals that China exercised its veto power least frequently. More recently, however, the country, whose political presence came to attract more

attention following its economy’s growth, began to resort to
the veto more frequently. That example alone demonstrates
how easily permanent

members

veto resolutions and how

those decisions can be used to further their national interests.

145

A

RANRE Re WORE DY iS

SROsis
iB EE

To cut a long story short, the world underwent massive
changes over the last 75 years. During the same period, the
United Nations failed to adapt to those new realities. It would
be a huge mistake to expect the UN, which was unfair and
dysfunctional from the beginning, to address current realities
and respond to the quest for justice. The current situation,
however, is unsustainable. The UN is in desperate need of

reform and that need must be addressed without delay. Otherwise, the world may quickly end up in a position that is bad
for all parties. Mankind may end up discussing the issue, after

severe suffering and losses, but it will already be too late. As
such, we must engage the question of justice and the pursuit
of peace in due time.

Turkey has, and will, always care about that pursuit deeply. To make the United Nations fairer and more resilient is
crucial for the international order’s legitimacy and progress.

It is necessary to support all steps in that direction and to
discuss all proposals honestly. This critical period we are going through today has such dangerous elements that no party

could shelter itself from its outcome.
The international community still needs to address pressing problems, including terrorism, migration, climate change,
global warming, starvation, drought, injustice and sustainable

growth, as well as the question of failed states. Unfortunately,
the prospect of war among nations has been recently added to
that list of challenges. The rise of societal reactiveness, exclu-

sive nationalism and protectionism is about to come full circle.
146

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

Humanity is heading to war. Tomorrow may be too late if we
fail to find solutions right now. War is a global problem. Its

prevention requires a global effort. Despite its various shortcomings, the UN remains the only tool that humanity can use.
As such, the UN must be reformed urgently and absolutely.

PRINCIPLES

FOR A UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

The time has come to launch a revolutionary effort to reform

the United Nations. Strong principles are needed, in turn, to
ensure that the reform movement can be consolidated and
taken to a certain point, where it will yield results. Those

same principles also serve as the main pillars of the new
system, which will be built to address the UN’s long-stand-

ing problems. The implementation of reforms for the United
Nations cannot take place in the absence of these principles.

Consequently, these principles must be inclusive and deep
enough to tackle current needs.

Justice must be the first principle. After all, any reform
plan must be centered around the principle of justice. Justice
is the shared value of all communities. All social and political

systems, irrespective of culture, civilization or religion, have
strived to create an order with justice at its core. All ancient civilizations built various systems that aimed to put justice first as

they developed their own social and political orders. Likewise,

the UN reform must be rooted in a set of principles, centered
around justice. Designing the new reform plan to address injus-

147

A

FAIRER

WORLD!

I1S°POSSIBLE

tice, too, will enable reforms to serve their intended purpose.
Yet the presence of a counterintuitive body, like the UN Secu-

rity Council, makes it effectively impossible to deliver justice.
In this regard, a new approach that blends security and justice
must be among the core principles of the reform process.
Equality, in turn, ought to complement the principle of justice. As such, equality is the second core principle of the philosophy of reform. To address global problems, not to mention disagreements among member states, the UN must treat
each member state as equals as a first step. In the absence of

equality, there can be no global justice. No nation that lacks
the necessary means to defend itself in the international arena
can be defended against more powerful players without the
principle of equality. As the UN Charter clearly outlines, the
international system is rooted in the principle of the sovereign equality of nations.
Yet the Charter also granted the veto power, a privilege, to

the most powerful members of the Security Council, making it
impossible for the principle of equality to apply. To make matters worse, the Security Council has positioned itself above the

member states by failing to act on their behalf — thus allowing
its permanent members to mount pressure on the rest.
Another core principle of the new reform plan is to ensure justice in representation. The international community

must address the problem of representation within the UN
framework for two reasons: First, there are new geopolitical
realities — which means that an international order, rooted in

148

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

World War II, cannot deliver justice. Let us keep in mind that

76 years have passed since that war. During that period, the
international system underwent three major transformations.

As such, the current practice of five permanent members representing the entire international community gives rise to an

extremely corrupt system. It goes without saying that a new

approach, which accurately reflects the multipolar nature of
the international system and takes into consideration the current balance of power, would make the United Nations more
just in terms of representation.

Secondly, the United Nations must accurately represent
the current demographic structure of the international sys-

tem. That the Muslim world, which has some

1.5 billion

members, cannot participate in the decision-making process
adequately is completely unacceptable. The same goes for all

other groups.
Another important principle of the new reform process is
transparency. Transparency is about where and how decisions

are made — and by whom. Indeed, the decisions reached by the
UN Security Council are known to the states that participate in
the decision-making process. Yet the remaining member states

are deprived of such knowledge. How decisions about the fate
of nations are made are vitally important for the UN’s credibility. In recent years, studies have shown that the international

community has remarkably low confidence in the UN’s ability
to perform its tasks. It is necessary to acknowledge that the root

cause of that problem is the lack of transparency.
149

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

Indeed, the international community’s confidence in the
United Nations has sharply declined in recent years. One
cannot reasonably expect an organization, where decisions

are not made transparently and openly and stakeholders engage in secret diplomacy to serve or hurt the interests of others, to be transparent. Is it remotely possible to deliver justice

by threatening smaller nations into submission or offering
rewards for their support? Was it acceptable to change the
legal status of Crimea through a fait accompli? Let us recall
the controversial decision by the United States regarding Pal-

estine. The General Assembly overwhelmingly opposed the
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, yet neither
the United States nor Israel changed their minds. The same

goes for Crimea. Secret diplomacy may be a useful tool to
prevent conflict. It creates a serious problem of credibility
for the United Nations, however, when decisions are made
through a non-transparent process that further complicates
problems and even creates deadlocks. As such, an effective
reform proposal must subscribe to the principle that trans-

parency must be at the heart of everything. A more transparent UN would give rise to a fairer decision-making pro-

cess, which, in turn, would permit all member states to learn
about the essence of each decision — along with where and
how those decisions are made.

In addition to transparency, an effective reform process must
be rooted in the principle of accountability. An international
organization like the United Nations, which is equipped with

150

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

necessary mechanisms to tackle each and every global issue,

ought to be accountable. Accountability rests on three pillars:

Primarily, the UN, which needs to manage crises, prevent conflict and preserve peace, must build a system of accountability
for the various bodies under its roof, which are related to those
processes. In other words, the UN must be held accountable for
its failure to respond to fresh crises in due time.

The second component

of accountability relates to the

member states. An effective system requires that each member state be equipped with some level of control and authority
over accountability. Indeed, it is extremely difficult for the UN
system to put in place an effective accountability mechanism
if the member states cannot monitor the organization. At the
same time, the member states, too, ought to be accountable.

Control cannot solve any problem by itself, hence the need
for all member states to be held accountable for their actions.
The third and final pillar of accountability is to create a
separate mechanism

to monitor it when internal auditing

mechanisms and the member states prove inadequate.
To implement effective reforms and make the UN more active, one of the core principles must be to cooperate with other international organizations. In recent years, there has been
an uptick in the number of regional organizations due to the
UN’s ineffectiveness. Those organizations are either formed
by multiple states and equipped with their own secretariat,
headquarters and organization, or they emerge with a specific

goal in mind, despite lacking an official status. As such, the
151

A

‘FAIRER

WORED

IS

POSSIBEE

reform process itself, as well as cooperation for the purpose of
making the UN more active, are extremely important.

Last but not least, the notion of prevention must be restored

as one of the principles that embody the spirit of a UN reform.
Provided that the UN was established to promote global peace
and to uphold stability, it is necessary to develop a doctrine of
prevention and to put in place practical mechanisms to facilitate its implementation.

PROBLEMS

WITH

EXISTING

REFORM

PROPOSALS

A quick glance at the previous discussions and past proposals
on reform reveals that the situation is quite grim. The existing
proposals either lack a concrete goal or proved inconclusive.

Although the debate started years ago and multiple proposals

have been made, officially and semi-officially, the reform effort was unable to make progress. Moreover, the discussion
became so complicated that it became almost impossible to
untangle the arguments. In the end, no proposed model went
beyond fueling fresh chaos. Most of those proposals were
killed off due to the expectations of certain nations and regions. Those countries, which formed a group to pursue specific objectives, projected their region’s position on the spirit

of reform. Other nations, who became aware of that fact, responded by adopting fresh positions. Thus the United Nations
reform fell victim to polarization and was drowned in details.
We must identify common

152

principles to.avoid polarization

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

and to launch a reform process with clear objectives. We
can successfully develop a new proposed model for reform,
which represents our common denominator, by learning the
relevant lessons from the problems with past proposals.
A quick look reveals three types of proposals, which approached the question of reform with an emphasis on five
main issues. All three types of proposals concentrate on the

following issues: The number of the Security Council’s members and the Security Council’s functioning; the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security Council; the

veto power of the Security Council’s permanent members;
membership

categories and regional representation.

Those

five main themes, together with a range of secondary (and
less important) issues, gave rise to three kinds of proposals:
(1) Expanding the Security Council, (2) changes related to the
organization’s functioning, and (3) the relationship between
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

First of all, the 2005 Annan Plan, which represented one
of the most serious attempts at reform, appears to have been
bogged down with the number of the Security Council’s members. There were two proposals, known

as Plan A and Plan

B, that respectively called for six new permanent and three
non-permanent members, and eight rotating and one non-per-

manent member. Those proposals, which seem to be the most
comprehensive plans, unfortunately, failed due to their lack of
inclusiveness, intention to address specific demands and encouragement of certain divisions. In other words, they exclu-

133

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

sively aimed to meet the expectations of countries that wanted
to join the Security Council, whereas they failed to address the
demands of all other nations. Indeed, the proposals even fell
short of satisfying member states that would presumably join

the Security Council as a result, because they created new areas of competition between the relevant countries.
The second kind of reform proposal focused exclusively
on the functioning of the United Nations. In this area, there
were three points of emphasis: Veto power, transparency and

the working principles. In truth, it is possible to view such
proposals as an attempt by member states, which expected to
join the Security Council but observed that not much progress
was being made, to open a new path for themselves and to receive certain concessions. For example, countries like Germa-

ny, which expected to become a permanent member yet faced
too many obstacles, supported this proposal with the intention to limit the powers of the permanent members. It is pos-

sible they viewed this move as a trump card in negotiations.
After all, the proposal rested on the assumption that imposing

limits on the veto power would result in the containment of
the permanent members. Likewise, the effort to address accountability, transparency and consistency was rooted in the

same mindset. The nations, which deemed themselves unlikely to become permanent members, made such proposals

in an attempt to contain permanent members exclusively. In
other words, those proposals were weaponized to threaten the
permanent members.

154

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

In this sense, countries like Germany signaled that they
were prepared to join forces with other member states to impose limits on the Security Council’s permanent members —

unless their demands were met. They deemed that insinua-

tion capable of strengthening their hand in negotiations with
the Council’s current permanent members. Indeed, such proposals are not intended to be genuine attempts at containment
and promoting a balance of power. Instead, they are reduced
to carefully prepared products within the context of negotiations. Likewise, the call for reforming the UN’s working prin-

ciples amounts to a kind of containment attempt.
It is possible to criticize the aforementioned proposal from
multiple perspectives. First of all, the proposal falls short of

representing a demand for comprehensive reform. Quite the
contrary, it appears to be nothing more than a bargaining chip.

After all, it seems that that plan was designed to address the
demands of certain countries and, therefore, did not amount
to a reform proposal that included all parties.

Secondly, this kind of proposal highlights national interests. There is an attempt here to place a nation’s own pursuit of
status at the heart of the reform agenda. Those nations, which

demand such change, view the call for change as a bargaining
chip to ensure that their demands are properly addressed.
Thirdly, such proposals appear to promote transparency, yet
threaten to create serious problems in terms of effectiveness.
One cannot address the question of transparency by increasing
the number of permanent members alone. Any attempt to re155

A

CPANRIER:

WORLD!

1S eP OS SUBLE

duce all problems with the UN’s functioning to legal questions
would inevitably fail to appreciate efforts at the political and
diplomatic levels. Indeed, many problems with the UN’s func-

tioning are rooted in practice and the widespread disregard for
principles — rather than the procedure itself.
Moreover, the development of such proposals turns the
question of reform into an area of competition between vari-

ous member states.
Finally, such partial reform proposals ultimately serve to
hinder any effort to implement fundamental reforms. Any reform proposal must be inclusive. All stakeholders must be
included in the reform process.

It is possible to describe the third kind of proposal as less
ambitious yet more focused on principles. Such proposals relate
to the relationship between the Security Council and the Gen-

eral Assembly. Accordingly, the General Assembly’s mandate
must be expanded for the sake of the UN’s proper functioning.
In situations where the Security Council alone has power, the
rest of the world appreciates that they are left without influence
over the decision-making process. Therefore, it is only natural
to expect and demand that the General Assembly become more

active. Yet the discussions on the establishment of that relationship and how much power the General Assembly ought to exercise continue on limited footing. The proponents of that kind of

reform want the General Assembly to have more authority over
consultations and coordination. In this sense, such proposals
aim to penetrate the wall instead of calling for comprehensive
156

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

change. Our purpose, however, must be to make the UN more

effective, rather than to further undermine it. Yet this proposal,
too, reflects the intention of member states, which deem themselves unlikely to join the Security Council, to secure concessions at the very least. In other words, that campaign for reform,

too, is subsumed to national interests.
It is clear that almost all such reform plans are devoid of a
principled stance. They are unable to disregard concrete national interests, prone to highlighting those areas, where certain countries enjoy advantages and are designed to limit the
advantage that others have in other areas. It would be possible
to identify three distinct categories if one were to create a hierarchy of expectations within the United Nations: The first
category includes permanent members.

The second group

consists of nations pursuing permanent membership. India,
Japan, Germany and Brazil are among the most prominent

members of that group. The third category refers to the rest of
the world. It includes a variety of member states, ranging from
the African Union and South America to European nations
like Italy and Asian countries like South Korea. Indeed, the

effort to reform the United Nations has been crushed by the
conflict of interest between these three groups. Whereas the

first group seeks to preserve its privileged position, members
of the second group attempt to either join the first group or
to limit the influence of the top category. The third group,
in turn, cannot even dream of joining the Security Council.
Hence their attempt to maximize the power of the General

157

& S

In truth, if we are serious about

looking for genuine reform, we
must stop shaping the debate
according to the expectations of
certain (groups of) states, and
instead develop new models
that are guided by fundamental
principles and provide a holistic
road map.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

Assembly. Yet those states also oppose the creation of fresh
privileges within the Security Council. As such, each group

fights the others and, occasionally, itself. Lines are drawn and
fronts are fortified. The pursuit of peace, justice and order
thus falls prey to national interests. Cooperation becomes im-

possible, as fresh quests end in deadlocks.
In fact, any reform proposal that genuinely promotes justice, peace, order and effectiveness must be abstract, princi-

pled, sincere and strong. Most importantly, it must be subject
to a specific timeline. It must translate abstract principles into
concrete, just and applicable results. Failure to address the

relevant issues with reference to abstract principles would
inevitably lead to unfair practices, the pursuit of personal in-

terests, and by extension, conflicts of interest. No such proposal would gain support in the end. Even if they were to be
accepted through coercion, there will be a lasting sense of

unfairness and, consequently, injustice.
As such, the question at hand must be engaged sincerely
and reference principles so that we remain blind to the interests of individual parties and build a strong structure to re-

flect the balance of power and the notion of justice. For example, it is time to end the practice of calling for the inclusion of
certain types of member states in the Security Council. This
issue is not about gross domestic product, population or the
representation of various continents.

Such an approach to the reform process would never yield

any results. It will be ultimately impossible to please all par159

A

FAFRER®

WORLD

IS

°POSSIBEE

ties and to make the United Nations more effective. Countries like Germany will maintain that the size of a member
state’s national economy must be taken into consideration.

India, in turn, will presumably call for representation on
the basis of population size. Whereas African nations will
demand representation on the basis of continents, Muslim

countries are likely to underline the importance of religious
representation. At the end of the day, the existing reform proposals cannot move forward because they are bogged down
with such considerations. Yet the problem at hand is more
complex still. There are bound to be disagreements between
the types of countries that will choose on the basis of those
criteria. Let us, for example, imagine African nations that
call for the inclusion of a member state from Africa. Is Egypt
supposed to represent the continent at the Security Council,

or Ethiopia or Kenya? What criteria will apply to the selection from among those nations? Who will be tasked to make
that choice? Keeping in mind that various countries, whose
names may or may not be on everyone’s radar, it becomes
clear that this particular approach would make the situation

highly problematic and ultimately impossible to address. In
truth, adopting this approach amounts to opting for a conflict

of interest from the start.

Unfortunately, the various proposals for a United Nations
reform were designed to defend the interests of certain nations instead of promoting the pursuit of peace and justice.

Hence the total lack of progress. Even the more comprehen-

160

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

sive plans, which were developed under the UN’s roof after
lengthy deliberations, ended up aiming to meet the concrete
expectations of certain nations. In truth, if we are serious about
looking for genuine reform, we must stop shaping the debate
according to the expectations of certain (groups of) states, and

instead develop new models that are guided by fundamental
principles and provide a holistic road map. Otherwise, such
proposals will neither serve the pursuit of justice, peace and
order nor encourage member states to revise their positions.
When the question at hand is reduced to the prospective
membership of certain nations in the Security Council, other member states disagree. Keeping in mind the presence of
multiple groups of states, it is quite clear that we cannot make
progress with this particular technique.
Any reform proposal must therefore meet the following
criteria at a minimum: First, all proposals must represent an
attempt to find a comprehensive and fundamental solution.
Long processes, which proceed step by step and are at con-

stant risk of discontinuation, result in endless discussions
and shift attention away from the main issues. Such processes

must be avoided at all costs.
Secondly, reform plans must concentrate on principles, as

opposed to the narrowly defined interests of certain states.
In particular, we must refrain from discussing which country
ought to join the Security Council or how many representa-

tives there should be from a given region. After all, given the
gravity of the global problems today, it is both difficult and
161

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

risky to build a philosophy of reform with reference to individual states.

Thirdly, it is necessary to clearly define the strategic objectives of any reform plan. Reform may be rooted in abstract
principles, yet there must be concrete goals. The objectives
ought to be practical and in line with the realities of international politics. Reform plans must focus on high-priority
issues instead of dealing with marginal matters.
Last but not least, the reform process must be subject to a
clear timeline. It must be clearly established which steps will
be taken at what point in time.
In contrast, almost none of the official reform proposals
before the United Nations (or the reform plans that individual members have unveiled) satisfy the above criteria. For the

most part, they do not seem to be comprehensive or fundamental. For example, countries like Germany, Japan, India
and Brazil, which deem themselves capable of joining the Se-

curity Council, have been busy reducing a UN reform to their
respective political agendas. Instead of discussing how a fair
and sustainable reform plan may be implemented through
dialogue with others, those nations attempt to persuade the

permanent members, who seem to be sympathetic to their
cause. At the end of the day, their understanding of “reform”
amounts to the pursuit of privileges for themselves. Ironically, the addition of new permanent members would only serve
to render the United Nations less effective and deepen the
sense of injustice. Unfortunately, those countries have been
162

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

after their own interests, rather than change. That is why others doubt their actions.

If Japan were to become a permanent member, would that
situation make South Korea happy? Won’t there be fresh injustices once Germany comes to enjoy the same privileges?

Keeping in mind that there are already two permanent members from Europe, would the inclusion of a third European
nation in the Security Council be understandable? Won’t it
cause other European states to react? Of course, it would. It

already does. Other European nations, including Italy, are understandably frustrated by this situation. Alternatively, who
would defend Pakistan if India were to become a permanent
member and enjoy veto powers? Is Brazil capable of representing all of South America alone? Of course not. To make
matters worse, its membership would unsettle the rest. Who
would be pleased by the invention of fresh privileges? Indeed,
those countries, too, are aware of the brewing frustration. As

such, they have never attempted to persuade member states
from their regions. Instead, they all concentrate on winning
over one or two permanent members that, they believe, are

sympathetic to their admission.

For example, Japan seeks

support from the United States - whereas China opposes its
inclusion. The United States may be open to Germany’s permanent membership, yet Russia is undoubtedly opposed.
That chaotic state of affairs yields no result or compromise.
The aforementioned member states, who have not made any

progress in years, should have long set aside their interests
163

A

FAIRER

WORLD

1S

POSSIBLE

and endorsed alternative solutions with the potential to benefit all parties. That was not the case. Instead of cooperating

with others, they left themselves at the mercy of the Security
Council’s permanent members. So much time has passed, yet
they have not made any progress. Having fully understood
their circumstances, they ended up making concessions in-

stead of finding more creative solutions.
For example, member states have been pushing for a type
of permanent membership without veto powers. That they
gave up on the pursuit of veto powers may be viewed as a
good thing for the United Nations. Perhaps they expect to be
accepted according to those terms. Would that solution actually solve anything? How would it help humanity? In what
sense would it improve the UN? What specific problems and
challenges would it address? None of it will work. Indeed, do
they really think they will be accepted, under those terms,
despite making concessions? This, too, is not an attainable

goal. It is a pursuit of interests rather than change. Ultimately,
it impedes true calls for reform.

More recently, the same countries went down a new road.
They set aside the pursuit of fundamental reform and em-

braced a new method, which, they hope, will allow them to
take gradual steps and secure concessions. They also came up
with a new discourse, whereby they concentrate on secondary issues, such as making the Security Council’s functioning

more transparent. For the record, that position is entirely right.
The Security Council is not a just, transparent or accountable

164

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

institution. It works in a primitive and partial way — which
is incompatible with modern concepts like common ground

and democratic decision-making. It must absolutely be more
transparent. It must absolutely be fairer. Its permanent members must absolutely answer for the reckless exercise of their
veto powers. Will the current debate lead anywhere though?
Alternatively, is this the UN’s most pressing problem?
Those

More

member

states do not just exercise veto powers.

frequently, they rely on the threat of a veto. They

threaten to veto resolutions, behind closed doors, to have
them

shelved

Council.

Hence

before

they are presented

our emphasis

to the Security

on the transparency

of the

decision-making process. Throughout the UN’s history, the
permanent members

relied more frequently on that threat

than actually vetoing resolutions. Resolutions, which were

expected to be vetoed anyway, never made it to the Security Council. To what extent can we make those deliberations
between the permanent members, which take place behind
closed doors, more transparent? Will the Security Council
become more transparent, even if the principle of transpar-

ency were accepted? Of course not. There may be procedural transparency in the Council’s day-to-day functioning, yet

the permanent members will easily resort to the veto threat
when critical decisions are made. Let us set aside all those
complex political processes. Will the UN’s problems go away
if the proceedings are truly transparent? No. Those nations,

which consider themselves above accountability, will still

165

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

exercise those powers — even with complete transparency. In
this sense, transparency is not the only problem at hand. It is
certainly not a problem whose solution would make a meaningful contribution to the resolution of the UN’s much more
pressing problems. The United Nations experiences much
more serious issues. Wasting time with such secondary matters impedes the reform agenda itself until the most pressing
problems are solved.
Such pursuits do not serve theinterests of those nations, the
United Nations or humanity in any way. Those states, which

reduce the whole question to their membership, must learn to
appreciate that no concession will be made in response to this
particular approach. They must also understand that there is

no guarantee that the permanent members will not violate the
proposed principle of transparency. Hence the ineffectiveness of that proposal. After all, the permanent members tend
to make use of their privileges to the fullest, while occasionally pretending to make concessions. For example, the French
offer to identify special working principles regarding crimes

against humanity and to abolish the veto power in related proceedings was neither realistic nor sincere. Indeed, France did
nothing more than engage in theatrics by pretending to make

a concession — although it was practically impossible to take
that step. At the same time, it would seem possible to define
crimes against humanity, yet the meaning of the term would

surely become a subject of debate if and when the Council
was to make a critical decision. In the end, it would be impos-

166

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

sible to reach an agreement. That is why limiting the reform
debate to such matters ultimately undermines reform efforts.
Likewise, it is narrow and pragmatic to engage in a discus-

sion over geographical regions. Clearly, regions like Africa
and South America are severely underrepresented. Therefore,
member states from those parts of the world, seemingly rightfully, think that they should join the Security Council. Specifically, African nations demand that no less than two member states from their continent be admitted with veto powers.
South America and the Caribbean, in turn, demand at least one

seat at the table. Would it be meaningful to grant veto powers
to more nations, however, provided that the Council is already

crippled by that same privilege? Would the problem of Africa’s underrepresentation go away and the continent’s voice be
heard if two African nations were to join the Council as per-

manent or non-permanent members? Of course not. Moreover,
who could possibly argue that all African nations had the same
interests? Could anyone guarantee that no two African nations
would ever fight each other? Who could, then, claim that two
African states could represent the entire continent?

Keeping in mind that nations that share land borders are
most likely to experience problems and fight wars, it goes
without saying that granting fresh privileges based on geographical location alone would only serve to fuel more injustice and instability. For example, would Egypt defend Sudan’s
rights if it were to join the Council? Could Nigeria represent
all of West Africa? How would countries like Cameroon and

167

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

Senegal respond to that development? To what extent could
South Africa represent the continent’s northern parts? Does it

make sense to imagine Africa as a monolithic entity — and thus
conclude that one African nation could speak for the rest?
If the debate focuses on this particular issue, could we really find solutions and reform the United Nations? If justice
and solidarity are what we genuinely seek, then no nation

will ever be persuaded by this debate over specific countries.
Itwould not only fail to enlist their support but actively cre-

ate new disagreements and fresh divisions.
Some (groups of) countries have concluded, in light of the

aforementioned challenges, that major changes and transformations were elusive. Therefore, they call for gradual steps

and various concessions. None of those opinions, however,
seems capable of liberating themselves from the narrow perspective rooted in national interests. Comprehensive changes

and major transformations could never take place as long as

the debate is limited to concessions. Reform plans could never yield desired results under those circumstances either. The
world’s most pressing problems are too deep and comprehensive to be solved with unilateral and gradual methods. At the

end of the day, the push for piecemeal reform accomplishes
little more than to start new and futile discussions.
Most of the proposals are so complex and fixated on secondary

issues

that it seems

impossible

to make

progress.

The nations, discouraged by the lack of progress in key areas, believe that they can move forward by concentrating on
168

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

less controversial agenda items. For example, some member
states argue that the reform campaign ought to begin with a
debate on the secretary-general’s role and powers. Likewise,
they make simple suggestions about the organization’s everyday operations. By the same token, yet others recommend
the reform plan focus on UN bodies, except the General As-

sembly and the Security Council. According to that gradual
approach, minor changes in one area could inspire more significant transformations in more important areas. Most of the
time, however, that expectation leads absolutely nowhere. After all, no member state could possibly predict the future due
to the absence of progress regarding primary issues — which
makes them reluctant to take bold steps in secondary areas.

Instead, the debate on the secondary questions serves as a distraction. New areas of disagreement emerge as member states

are divided into new groups. Indeed, gradual and overextended processes with no clear priorities necessitate that all 193

member states are persuaded time and again. It is simply impossible to make progress by embracing that gradual method.
Therefore, the reform plan must be comprehensive, radical
and revolutionary. Instead of losing sight of the big picture by
fixating on secondary issues, we must promote unity around

a single issue. The plan needs to identify the single most important question and highlight it. It must change the course
of the UN’s history. Gradual steps and slow progress, in contrast, create expectations

detached

from reality. We

must

learn not to view a UN reform as a process. No discussion,

169

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

which requires consensus

among

the 193 member

states,

could be spread over time or focus on a multitude of issues.
The duration and scope of such debates tend to bring up other
expectations that the relevant member states may have.

Reform must take place instantly — instead of being a process. It must be built around a single question and backed by

implementation without delay. Debating the role and powers
of the secretary-general, in this sense, is a total waste of time

and an ultimately fruitless effort. As such, it is crucial to identify the UN’s most pressing problem, as a first step, and to
tackle the issue in a single attempt.

Open-ended meetings and the idea of groups of nations tend
to spread the debate across time and space. In other words,
its scope keeps expanding. During that expansion, the debate

loses focus, becomes personal and gets more and more complex. The situation thus grows too complex to address. Another issue is related to this matter directly. Unfortunately, most
nations view the question of reform with an eye on their own
privileges, not as a global issue. That perspective translates
into fresh injustices and new problems of functionality. Those
(groups of) nations, which approach this question from their

perspective, naturally face backlash from others. For example,
the G4 nations (Germany, Japan, Brazil and India) pursue permanent membership in the Security Council. The permanent
members

respond by trying to keep them out. Alternative-

ly, some permanent members only support the admission of
countries that are likely to get along with themselves. That
170

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

reaction naturally creates political deadlocks. Such efforts are
neither politically feasible nor morally acceptable. Moreover,
the push for membership by the G4 nations encourages other

member states to oppose them. Consequently, each member
ends up bringing their own agenda to the table.
That is exactly why we must engage the question of reform
in principle and based on abstract agenda items. No progress
can be made by concentrating on the concrete objectives of the
relevant member states. Even if there were progress, there could
be no actual solution. For instance, certain numbers are mentioned in plans for the Security Council’s expansion. Numbers
like 25 or 34 can be found in those proposals. As a matter of
fact, it is already clear which member states shall join the Council from the relevant groups of nations. There may be no names,

but one could easily understand which nations are meant to
join just by looking at the numbers. Such proposals, which ap-

pear to have been tailored, naturally create conflicts of interest
among member states. Hence their total rejection. That is why
any reform proposal ought to be built in an abstract, principled
and comprehensive manner to address humanity’s problems
instead of focusing on the names of specific nations. Only then
can we make progress and restore some sense of justice.
The third attribute of a fair and applicable reform proposal is its focus on strategic goals. Former Secretary-General

Kofi Annan, who pioneered a reform effort years ago, had
described in detail his proposals. Yet the plan was so comprehensive and diverse that making progress proved virtually
171

& G

We cannot afford to leave the
United Nations to the mercy of
powerful nations.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

impossible. Proposals, which consist of clusters of plans and
recommendations,

do not lead to applicable road maps. For

example, that proposal focused on five main issues, put forth
two plans and reached out to seven groups of nations. In this

sense, one could argue that a broad road map had been presented at the time. Yet the proposal lacked a coherent road
map. It was unclear how the plan would be implemented, or
which items were considered most important. Despite seeming to appeal to everyone, the reform proposal did not have
any strategic priorities. Consequently, each member state advocated the parts of the proposal that were compatible with
their positions. Those plans were so devoid of principles, so

concrete, broad, complex and different that they fueled chaos
and_ conflict instead of finding a way forward. Lacking focus

and priorities, the proposal ended up creating new categories
and, consequently, starting new fights.
There were five areas of reform that the proposal identified:
The UN Security Council’s structure, veto powers, regional

representation, membership categories, and the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security Council.
It goes without saying that all those areas were important.

However, the proposal did not identify its top priorities — thus
starting five distinct discussions. Those debates became insti-

tutionalized and the resulting shift in focus made it impossible to pay as much attention to any issue as it deserved.

Even today, any discussion about reform takes place on

those five platforms simultaneously. Each member state idenUys

A

FAIRER

WORLD

I'S

POSSIBLE

tifies its priorities based on those five categories and hits a
dead end. For example, the number of Security Council members tends to become the subject of debate itself. Each group

prefers a different, specific model. At the same time, different
categories of nations come into the discussion. For instance,

Egypt pushes for a specific plan that would serve its interests as an African, non-aligned and Arab country. The most
strategically important issue, however, is that no party gets to

question the veto power due to those discussions. No member

state dares to scrutinize the relationship between the General Assembly and the Security Council. A proposal, however,
ought to be comprehensive as well as strategic. It must identify a set of priorities. Its red lines must be clearly marked. It
must describe negotiable points and highlight what is urgent.

It must also explain which issues may be addressed over time.
At the same time, the plan must take all the steps in abstract
terms and with reference to principles, so that cooperation

and harmony may prevail over fighting and competition.
If we are seriously looking for peace, justice and order in

world politics and at the United Nations, then those questions
must be addressed in abstract, principled and comprehensive
ways. The formula must present a kind of global order. The

most important of those five areas must be determined and
applicable strategies must be developed; regarding them, with
reference to abstract concepts first. Abstract principles must
be put in place before concrete matters are resolved according
to the plan’s principles and within the UN framework.

174

A PRINCIPLED, COMPREHENSIVE
STRATEGIC PROPOSAL

AND

A proposal based on principles refers to identifying general
principles, instead of departing from the narrow interests of
individual states, and must appeal to the whole. The classification of abstract principles may stop the resulting proposal
from serving the interests of certain stakeholders exclusive-

ly. A comprehensive proposal, in turn, means to avoid fresh
chaos, confrontation and problems — even if it does not solve
all problems or meet every state’s expectations. Most impor-

tant, however, is that the reform proposal is strategic.

A com-

prehensive and abstract proposal, rooted in principles, must
rest on a strategic approach to be applicable. Being strategic
means properly defining one’s objectives, means and methods to successfully forge a relationship between them. In other words, it is about setting priorities, ranking principles and

explaining how and with which tools one intends to reach
those priorities. It is possible to argue that only such a proposal may give rise to a sustainable, if not ideal, model.
Of course, one could make certain idealist proposals for a
solution. In the past, too, certain proposals have been made

to reform the United Nations. Such proposals, however, cannot be sustainable unless grounded in reality. Consequently,
they may yield even worse results — even if they may attain
justice. For example, some people may be dreaming of an or-

ganization in which all states are represented equally. That
may seem like an ideal solution to anyone subscribing to the
175

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

view that justice is equality. Indeed, that mindset informed
the League of Nations. Its founders dreamed of establishing a
Parliament, where nations, enjoying equal rights, could find a
common ground. In truth, such proposals are neither sustainable nor truly fair. Whereas justice may be about equal representation for people, the notion that justice requires equal
representation for states is questionable at best. After all, China’s population has reached 1.5 billion today, whereas some
states have less than 1 million citizens. As such, equal representation for states may lead to problems, such as inequality in representation, for individuals. In other words, ensuring

the equal representation of states would not automatically
mean that justice could prevail in the international system.
On the other hand, history already taught us that such a
mechanism lacked sustainability. The League of Nations appeared to rest on the principle of equal representation, yet it
was neither fair nor effective. Humanity sadly witnessed the
weakness of the League of Nations when World War II broke
out. We do not need to test that same hypothesis once more.
A plan based on the idea of a “world government” is not preferable or likely to succeed. It is nothing but a dream to expect

states to transfer their sovereignty to an international body
dominated by the most powerful nations.
We cannot afford to leave the United Nations to the mercy

of those powerful nations either. Nor is the solution to put
the great powers in charge permanently, based on relevant
criteria such as population size, economic power or military

176

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

capabilities. Obviously, no nation ought to enjoy privileges
just because they have more citizens than other countries. Nor
should military might alone generate authority. Quite the contrary, any reform proposal must be geared toward limiting the
unfair practices of militarily powerful nations at the expense
of others. At the same time, let us take into account that any
given country with a strong economy today may no longer be

among the world’s top economic powers in the future. As such,
proposals rooted in great power status may seem sustainable
but are neither fair nor sustainable in the end. Humanity tested that hypothesis, too, in the 19" century. A system of great
powers, known as the Concert of Europe, was established in
Vienna in 1815. That plan made it less likely for the great powers to fight wars thanks to diplomatic maneuvers, yet became
the backbone of colonialism and a range of other unfair practices. In the end, there was no great war in Europe, yet European states expanded to other places, thus planting the seeds of
the next great catastrophe. That system thus postponed great
power competition thanks to the colonial race, yet ultimately

served to fuel hostility with the help of wealth generated in the
colonies. At the end of the day, it resulted in World War I.
Indeed, the League of Nations, which emerged after the Great
War, was a reaction to the Concert of Europe. Instead of the system of great powers under the Concert of Europe, it advocated
an egalitarian order. Whereas the Concert of Europe was rooted

in absolute inequality, the League of Nations operated based
on absolute equality. The two world wars, however, taught hu-

WWI

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

manity that both approaches were highly problematic. The UN,
therefore, was imagined as a mixture of those two positions.
It was portrayed as a new model that combined the seemingly
successful parts of both approaches. Yet such mixtures may end

up bringing out the worst parts of their components — rather
than the best. That is exactly what happened with the United
Nations. The Concert of Europe seemed stable yet unsustaina-

ble. The League of Nations seemed fair yet unstable. The UN, in
turn, was portrayed as both sustainable and fair. In the end, it
turned out to be neither fair nor sustainable, because it created
a balance of power within the Security Council — rather than
the General Assembly. That decision resulted in unfairness and
deadlocks. In the end, the General Assembly was reduced to
a mechanism of appeasement. The Security Council, in turn,

ended up safeguarding the privileges of the great powers.
The interests of the most powerful nations became the
UN’s top priority. The rest were expected to fall in line. The
Security Council granted notable rights to the great powers,

yet did not give them any responsibility. Their positions within the Council were guaranteed no matter the circumstances.

In truth, what needed to happen was for the great powers to
assume more responsibility and to exercise less power. The

General Assembly should have been able to elect and monitor the Security Council instead of becoming a simple forum.
Unfortunately, however, the UN’s founding logic went in the
opposite direction. Hence the organization’s inability to meet
humanity’s expectations.

178

JUSTICE

IN REPRESENTATION

The United Nations was established in 1945 by only 51 countries. Today, the organization has 193 members. In other words,

the number of member states quadrupled during that period.
As such, we can no longer treat the UN as an organization de-

signed by the victors of World War II. Indeed, Germany and
Japan, which lost that war, became the second and third largest contributors to the UN’s budget. Whereas financial support
from permanent members like France, the United Kingdom and
Russia has decreased, the rising powers shoulder a more signif-

icant share of the financial burden. The United Nations, however, has not been restructured to reflect those developments.

One of the main objectives of the UN reform must be to
promote justice in representation.

Therefore, the organiza-

tion must be restructured to ensure that all parts of the world
are adequately represented — as a priority. Two European na-

tions are members of the Security Council today, despite the
absence of representatives from South America and Africa.

Notably, Europe constitutes just 5 percent of the global population. South America, which is home to over 600 million
people, does not have any representatives in the UN Securi-

ty Council; nor has Africa, which has 1.2 billion inhabitants,
been granted a seat at the table.
Yet another impediment to just representation is the ab-

sence of multiculturalism.

Whereas

four permanent mem-

bers have a predominantly Christian population, the Islamic
world, which consists of 1.5 billion people, has no represent179

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

atives in the Security Council. Indeed,

a comprehensive and

fair reform agenda must reflect the world’s cultural diversity.
Another source of the problem of underrepresentation is
related to demographics. Four countries — India, Brazil, Indo-

nesia and Pakistan — constitute a quarter of the global population today. Yet none of those countries are members of the Se-

curity Council. In other words, the five permanent members
represent no more than a quarter of the world’s population.
Whereas they represented 60 percent of all people back in
1945, that number has dropped to 26 percent now. As such,
74 percent of the global population has been deprived of in-

fluence and power. Five nations, which speak for a quarter of
humanity, in contrast, get to enjoy their privileges arbitrarily
and without accountability. Could we promote justice with
this kind of representation? Could the United Nations accomplish its mission as injustice in representation gets deeper
and deeper? Absolutely not. Indeed, only a small number of
the permanent members’ citizens actually support the UN.
The rest seem to agree that the organization cannot perform
its tasks properly.
From an economic perspective, the United Nations also
suffers from a shortage of representation. The five permanent

members account for 42 percent of the organization’s budget,
whereas the rest (who cover 58 percent) make contributions

without any influence.

Keeping in mind that the United

States contributes 22 percent, the remaining four permanent

members cover just 20 percent altogether — which is striking.
180

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

In other words, four nations cover just one-fifth of the UN’s

costs and enjoy all the privileges. Could this state of affairs
contribute to the emergence of a healthier situation?

The world is nothing like what it was in 1945. No indicators whatsoever remained unaltered since that time. Ma-

jor changes took place financially, militarily, socially and
culturally. None of those changes, however, translated into
meaningful revisions of the United Nations. Indeed, the organization deliberately refrained from adapting to the fresh
circumstances. It not only fell short of meeting expectations
in terms of justice but also failed to adapt to the new realities.
Yet the UN is not just out of touch with the current real-

ities. Unfortunately, the organization has experienced problems. with justice and effectiveness since the very beginning.
Who could actually claim that the UN functioned properly
during the Cold War? The organization represented a plat-

form for diplomatic competition between the United States
and Russia but solved problems only rarely. At the time, the
permanent members had no problem irresponsibly exercising
their veto rights: The Soviet Union vetoed 90 resolutions dur-

ing the Cold War, whereas the United States blocked 68 decisions. The rest of the world could not override any of those
vetoes, even if they were all to join forces. During that period, the USSR rejected all of the Western alliance’s demands,

whereas the U.S. willingly defended Israel’s unrestricted activities. The veto stood in the way of all attempts to promote
peace and justice regarding the Palestinian-Israeli question,

181

& &

Whereas America attempted to
legitimize its planned military
operations on the UN floor, Russia
and the rest kept exploiting the
organization and their privileges
as they saw fit.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

too. In the end, Palestine was left to suffer for decades. The
United Nations took no realistic steps in the face of so much

oppression. Likewise, the United Kingdom and France acted
similarly to defend their narrow interests. Both nations resorted to the veto in such situations, as the Suez Crisis clearly

demonstrated. For five decades, the UN was forced to operate
under Cold War conditions.

Hope could have prevailed when the Cold War came to an
end. Yet that hope, too, was crushed quite quickly. The great
powers, starting with the United States, never ceased to view
the organization as a foreign policy tool. Whereas America

attempted to legitimize its planned military operations on the
UN floor, Russia and the rest kept exploiting the organization
and their privileges as they saw fit. Unfortunately, the search
for a new order and justice was never carried out sincerely.
What happened in 2003, just before the second Gulf War, was

a striking case in point: The United States alleged that Iraq

possessed weapons of mass destruction at the Security Council in an attempt to legitimize its imminent occupation of the
country. Having failed to persuade the Council, Washington

proved capable of disregarding the UN’s legitimacy. The organization was thus stripped of its essence once again.

183

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY AND THE SECURITY COUNCIL

The pursuit of a comprehensive,

principled and abstract

proposal must focus on the relationship between the General Assembly and the Security Council. No attempted reform
may yield desired results unless and until that relationship

is revised to benefit the General Assembly. It cannot live up

to the principles of justice and functionality either. After all,
the General Assembly represents all nations, whereas the Security Council includes a limited number of stakeholders. In

this sense, it is only natural, as a political principle, that the
Security Council be subject to, emerge out of and answer to
the General Assembly. The United Nations has experienced
serious problems for years because the relationship was engineered in the opposite direction. Indeed, the General Assembly cannot be treated as a legitimizing tool for the Security
Council’s decisions. Quite the contrary, we must opt for reform whereby the Security Council is authorized by the General Assembly.

That demand for reform is so deeply rooted that its implementation requires the reversal of every single relationship

within the United Nations. It would uproot the current arrangement, under which the Council’s permanent members

enjoy

unrestricted authority without an iota of accountability, and
reshape the Security Council in line with global expectations.
Such a system would neither treat all nations the same nor

put in place irreversible privileges. The members of the Secu184

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

rity Council must emerge out of the General Assembly. Their

membership terms ought to be limited. In other words, there
must be no such thing as permanent membership. That principle, in turn, should represent the backbone of reform. All
veto powers must be abolished as we adopt a system based
on taking turns. No nation must be part of the Security Council indefinitely. Each member should be expected to pursue
re-election when their term ends. To join the Security Coun-

cil, all member states ought to comply with competitive arrangements. They must act in accordance with the General

Assembly’s expectations. Once the system is revised accordingly, the Security Council’s elected members shall enjoy au-

thority and accept certain obligations.
The General Assembly was deprived of authority and influence since the UN’s conception. Under a system in which

five permanent members exercise unlimited power, the rest
was left to the mercy of those nations in decision-making processes. Today, a single Security Council member can block
an extremely important decision by the General Assembly by

exercising their veto power — even if a broad consensus was
reached to pass the resolution. It is specifically this rule that
must be reversed to make genuine reforms a possibility. All
other steps must be facilitated by this single change.
This proposal is no different than the pursuit of a social

contract. In truth, the UN Charter may be viewed as a kind
of global constitution, too. That constitution, however, was
drafted by the victors of World War II. All other nations were

185

& &

A system rooted in privilege,
under which five permanent
members

look down on the rest,

neglect their ob ligations and
impose their own interests on the
world, is no longer sustainable.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

compelled to consent. As such, a genuine reform proposal
must primarily analyze the current contract and tackle its
most fundamental aspects. The new contract, which will be
born out of the principles of justice and functionality, shall
comply with the former principles by putting the General Assembly, which represents and consists of all member states,
first — instead of the Security Council, where only the privileged get to make decisions.
At the same time, it will be possible to observe the principle of functionality, if the Council emerges out of the General

Assembly and aims to serve it. Therefore, all nations, large
and small, ought to disregard the differences between their
respective amounts of power and respect these principles all
the same. We cannot make any progress unless and until all

parties exercise the right to choose and to contest elections to
an equal extent. For the record, that does not mean that the

entire UN system will be regulated according to an absolute
notion of equality, which would ignore the principles of sustainability and effectiveness. Quite the contrary, there will be
room for political freedom and competition within that system. Indeed, those member states, which intend to exercise
executive authority and are prepared to assume the relevant

responsibilities, will be compelled to compete for the General

Assembly’s endorsement. That path will always be open for
any nation willing and able to assume responsibility.
To put it all in more concrete terms, the UN General Assembly must become a platform that promotes justice, where
187

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

member states may vote as equals. Members of the Security Council, in turn, must be elected from among the nations
with equal voting rights. In other words, the Assembly ought

to operate like a legislative assembly and make the rules. The
Council, in contrast, should play the role of a government that
emerges out of the parliament. We must abolish permanent
memberships and privileges, and replace them with the principles of equality, transparency and accountability.

In truth, under those rules, the General Assembly must be
the legislative body. The Security Council, in turn, must as-

sume the role of the executive branch. That is the only way
to implement a radical reform plan. That proposal would take
individual member states out of the picture and put an end
to injustice. It would both safeguard equality and uphold the
freedom to assume responsibility. At the same time, this plan

would eliminate the problem of permanent membership. Under the proposed rules, any member state that wants a seat
in the Security Council (and is able and willing) would be

compelled to take seriously the demands of General Assembly members as well as answer to, and implement decisions
made by, the General Assembly. They will have to assume
more and more responsibility to pursue re-election.

Furthermore,

prospective members

of the Council will

have to compete against others to assume

sponsibilities.

the relevant re-

A system rooted in privilege, under which five

permanent members look down on the rest, neglect their obligations and impose their own interests on the world, is no

longer sustainable.
188

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

If genuine reform is what humanity desires, there is no
point in discussing and wasting time with partial and narrow
proposals.

That practice causes a waste of energy. That such

a proposal is being made is significant, even if only because it
promises to end divisions.

It is not possible to argue that this proposal is final. A discussion, however, is desperately needed. Instead of partial
and gradual proposals, we must bring to the table comprehen-

sive and radical plans. We can thus open to discussion those
reform proposals and compare them with alternative plans,
provided that such plans exist. Ultimately, humanity stands

to lose if this matter cannot be discussed right away.

ABOLISHING

THE VETO

POWER

The comprehensive reform model, which was described above,

is a proposal that is open to discussion. It is possible to make

room for that (or another) model in our agenda and to hold a
debate. However, abolishing the veto privilege is the essential
starting point and most strategic goal for any reform model.

After all, neither the above-described model nor any alternative approaches that may be proposed in the future can have

any chance of success unless the five countries are stripped of
their veto power. Likewise, engaging other questions instead or

in addition to the question of the veto power would inevitably
hinder any quest for reform. Therefore, the most crucial part of

any reform plan must be to tackle and abolish the veto power.

189

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

It is not possible to take a single step forward in the absence of
an all-out offensive against the veto power. Hence the need to
strive to abolish the veto power as part of the above-mentioned
or any alternative reform proposal.
A quick glance at the history of the United Nations reveals
that the permanent members have exercised their veto powers conveniently and regarding the most pressing issues. Specifically, the UN Security Council vetoed 249 out of the 2,446
draft resolutions. Russia and the United States vetoed 112
and 81 resolutions, respectively, whereas the United Kingdom exercised its veto power 29 times. France and China, in

turn, vetoed 16 and 11 resolutions. In other words, almost
10 percent of all draft resolutions that came before the UN
Security Council have been vetoed by one or more permanent
members and, consequently, failed. Let us not be distracted

by the remaining 90 percent. The Council rarely adopted resolutions pertaining to the most pressing issues; whereas the

permanent members exercised their veto powers regarding

those draft resolutions related to the more critical questions.
Furthermore, much worse than the exercise of the veto power
is the threat of a veto. Unfortunately, that threat was made,
off the books, hundreds of times, preventing the Council from

even exchanging views on the relevant issues. In other words,
many political and strategic discussions are shelved due to
one or more permanent members expressing their intention

to veto any draft resolutions behind closed doors. With the

solution of dozens of questions still pending in world poli-

190

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

tics, such games played within the Security Council render
the United Nations ineffective and prevent it from addressing
issues related to world peace.
The post-World War II international order is crumbling today. International organizations designed to promote order in
world politics grow more and more dysfunctional every pass-

ing day. Such institutions, which were never fair, ended up
unable to preserve even their current standing. States place
less trust in those organizations and attach less importance
to their duties and responsibilities within those institutional

frameworks. Ironically, the original purpose of such organizations was to promote international peace and justice. That

order, which emerged after World War II, was designed to in-

crease each nation’s ability to represent their views and to preserve international peace. Under the current circumstances,
however, it is not possible to argue that the international order

serves the cause of justice or performs its intended tasks.
Unfortunately, none of the reform proposals for the United
Nations include even the slightest reference to abolishing the
veto power. Yet the veto power is the root cause of the UN’s

ineffectiveness. Instead, those reform plans overwhelmingly
aim to increase the number of Security Council members. In
other words, those states, which hope to have a seat at the

table, merely demand similar privileges. To grant veto powers to more nations, however, would only serve to make the

situation infinitely complicated and, ultimately, to render the
UN more and more ineffective. Such new privileges would
191

G -

Unfortunately, none of the
reform proposals for the United
Nations include even the slightest
reference to abolishing the
veto power. Yet the veto power
is the root cause of the UN’s
ineffectiveness.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

make the Security Council, which already suffers from ineffectiveness and a shortage of influence, less functional. Instead of granting such powers to more states, the international
community must look for ways to completely abolish the veto
power. After all, any reform attempt that does not problematize the veto power is doomed to failure.
Notwithstanding

all other issues, failure to identify the

principle of containing the veto power as a top priority could

result in the undoing of years of reform efforts with a single veto. The UN may have many bleeding wounds, but this
wound is most painful and requires the most urgent attention.
There is no point in paying attention to other questions un-

less and until this problem is solved. Hence our motto: “The
world is bigger than five.” There are many ways to describe

the world. Yet the ultimate problem is its reduction to five. No

one could argue that those privileges are fair.
More importantly, no one can claim that such privilege helps

the United Nations function better. The whole world could not
override a single veto, even if all nations were to unite over an

emerging problem somewhere on the planet. That is why the

UN is pushed aside every single time. It becomes an empty organization in which no one truly believes. The veto power was
not put in place to promote international stability or to improve

the effectiveness of the great powers. Indeed, the veto power
inherently lacks the ability to generate positive results. Quite
the contrary, it was designed in a negative sense. The veto pow-

er only helps the five permanent members to safeguard their
193

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

interests and to push back against a multitude of member states
forming a group to challenge them. Indeed, a quick glance at
the history of the United Nations would reveal that the relevant
countries exercised their veto power quite comfortably and in
line with their national interest.

To summarize, abolishing the veto power must be the first
step toward a United Nations reform. The international com-

munity ought to subsequently build a new UN with an eye
on comprehensive and principle proposals. Within that new
framework, the General Assembly must play the role of a leg-

islative assembly, whereas the Security Council should evolve
into a board of executives. There will be no insoluble problems
once those two steps are taken. All questions pertaining to re-

form can be solved as soon as those two steps are taken.

AN APPLICABLE

PROPOSAL

The first line of criticism against such a fundamental reform
proposal would presumably be related to the challenges of

implementation. In other words, critics would claim that the
established patterns of behavior in the international arena
would get in the way of comprehensive reform -specifically,
abolishing the veto power — and that the member states would
not consent to the restructuring of the United Nations. Surely,
we do not expect all states to endorse such a fundamental and
comprehensive proposal immediately. One cannot reasonably
claim, however, that this proposal has no chance of being im-

194

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

plemented. If there is any proposal with the potential to be im-

plemented, it is a proposal that will spring out of the veto power’s abolishment, widen the powers of the General Assembly,
and identify certain responsibilities for the great powers that
seek to enjoy certain privileges as Security Council members.
The proposal, which was outlined above, does not represent a violation of the sovereign rights of individual states.
Quite the contrary, it aims to prevent the exercise of undeserved sovereign rights by five states and to safeguard the sovereign rights of most states around the world. Indeed, demanding a restriction on the sovereign rights of all nations is not an
acceptable or practical plan. Such efforts did not yield results

in the past either. In particular, the League of Nations represents a suitable case in point. Originally outlined by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, the project was left without a champion when the United States left, and later, rendered ineffective

by the carelessness of the great powers. States are reluctant to
transfer an important portion of their power to a higher authority. It is obvious we stand to face those same inclinations.
Such a proposal would only disturb a small number of

stakeholders. The permanent members of the Security Council stand to complain about the idea of parting ways with their
veto powers and the restrictions on the Security Council’s authority and privileges. This proposal will not deprive mem-

ber states of their sovereign rights. It merely recommends the
United Nations become fairer and more active. It focuses on

positive outcomes rather than negative results.
195

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

That is why this proposal has a chance of gaining accept-

ance. As mentioned above, it is possible to identify three distinct approaches to a United Nations reform: The five permanent members constitute the first group. The second group,
the G4 nations, demand permanent membership and believe
that they are close to that goal. The third and largest group,
in turn, consists of all member states except those nine countries. Those nations do not exercise or dream of veto power.

To implement reforms from the bottom, that large group of
nations must set aside their minor disagreements over the na-

ture of reform, which are divisive and detrimental, and concentrate on abolishing the veto power altogether. Uniting for
Consensus, of which Turkey is a member, has the potential

to forge a coalition to bring together all nations that do not
dream of the veto power. Indeed, the G4 nations, too, will

be compelled to join the rest, if the members of that large
group can disregard their disagreements and join forces to
abolish the veto power. After all, those countries, which will

conclude that the five permanent members won’t make any
concessions, would rather join Uniting for Consensus than let

those five states enjoy a privilege that the G4 nations cannot.
To accomplish that goal, however, the Uniting for Consensus
group must settle all disputes among its members.
Turkey strongly supports Uniting for Consensus because
that group

encourages

broad participation

and pluralism.

Only a group with such legitimacy can create a righteous

footing for reform efforts. For example, the African Group ob196

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

viously has a right to make demands. Yet it lacks the ability
to persuade the rest to join due to their exclusive focus on a

single region. On the other hand, no group of nations can or

will agree to the demands of the G4 nations. The only option
available to those countries is to join the Uniting for Consensus group. That group, which has members from all regions,
demographic

backgrounds

and development

levels, could

both create a basis of legitimacy and become more pluralistic.
Hence its heightened ability to push for change.
In this regard, the Consensus group has already established,
through its demands, expectations and actions, that it repre-

sents the best available platform. First and foremost, it opposes
any form of privilege. As such, the group’s reform plan remains
the most pluralistic option on the table. By refusing to explore

avenues in which only African or European nations are interested, it has the highest chance of inclusiveness. That is how
the group could host a meeting in Rome with 120 member
states present. Needless to say, that effort would become even

stronger if the G4 nations, members of the African Group and
other states from various continents were to join the group.

Although the Uniting for Consensus group developed the
fairest proposal to date, it is not possible to argue that there
are absolutely no problems with that plan. It may be more just
to expand the Security Council on a rotating basis, yet problems could occur in the future vis-a-vis implementation. One
way or another, that proposal, too, represents an effort to add

new members — which may further complicate the Security
197

bs G

Let the world decide and scream
that the world is bigger than five.
Let those five countries bear
the shameful responsibility of
rejecting it.

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

Council’s functioning. Furthermore, that step would not have
any impact on the veto power, which is the real problem here.
In contrast, restricting the veto power would be the best plan
on which the Uniting for Consensus group could agree. Prob-

lems may occur during the pursuit of a consensus over a positive agenda, but it is far more likely that member states will
join a common effort against the veto power. Our position is
that the main purpose of the Uniting for Consensus group may

be subject to discussion, yet its current focus ought to be the
fight against the veto power. After all, no genuine quest will
ever succeed until that pressing problem is resolved.
The first and most important question that comes to mind
relates to the implementation of the proposal. Some parties
wil] inevitably claim it to be out of touch with reality, no matter how just, reasonable, sustainable, effective, comprehensive

and principled it may be. In the end, no reform can be expected to be accepted unless the five permanent members are per-

suaded, even if all other nations were to form a united front.
Naturally, the permanent members will reject any attempt to
abolish their veto powers by exercising them. As such, the implementation of that plan may seem legally impossible.
The question at hand, however, is beyond legal and institutional matters. If anything, the question of reform is about

politics and diplomacy, rather than the law. Therefore, a successful model for reform, which emerges in the realm of politics and diplomacy, may still give rise to a new set of rules,
even if that proposal is rejected by the Security Council’s
199

A

FAIRER

WORLD

1S

POSSIBLE

permanent members. If the General Assembly’s overwhelming
majority agree on a proposal, against the wishes of the five

permanent members, the Security Council may be deprived of
its legitimacy — even if it manages to uphold the law.
In this sense, the real challenge is to get enough member states
to work together. It is no secret that the possibility of cooperation may be reduced due to the growing number of participants.
After all, many nations may prefer to watch from the sidelines

and become free riders instead of taking the risk of becoming a
party. It is not impossible, however, to adopt a common stance
on a single issue, which may be causing grievances for all participants, within an already institutionalized framework.
According to the UN Charter, a two-thirds majority is needed for the General Assembly to pass a binding resolution before that resolution is adopted by the Security Council in the

absence of a veto. As such, the first step must be to secure a
two-thirds majority. Some parties may assume that such a majority is elusive due to the problem of joint action. That is not

true. The 2011 meeting in Rome proved the Uniting for Consensus group to be capable of bringing together 120 nations.
Provided that so many countries gathered at the time, despite

fragmentation, an unclear agenda and a low chance of success,
one cannot assume today that a two-thirds majority (or more
than 130 countries) is not within reach.

In this sense, it may be possible to make a joint decision at

a summit with a single item on its agenda. At the very least, we
must strive to demonstrate our commitment to look for such a

200

A

UNITED

NATIONS

REFORM

solution. It may take years to organize that summit, yet the debate itself may serve as an important source of pressure. Indeed,
if the Uniting for Consensus group could bring so many nations
together to hold an incoherent discussion, it would be much
easier to exchange views on an issue like the veto power.
Obviously, the main challenge here is the prospect of a veto
from the Security Council, even if such a decision was made and

the General Assembly were to hold a vote without any problems.
That response is highly likely. Judging by the current attitude
of the five permanent members, they are unsettled by the ongoing discussion — not to mention unwilling to part with their
privileges. As such, the Security Council may end up rejecting
any relevant resolution passed by the General Assembly. Still, it
is important to raise the following point: That veto would have

serious consequences. The exercise of veto powers, despite an

agreement by two-thirds of the General Assembly's members,
would render the United Nations ultimately illegitimate and re-

duce it to a shell. In truth, the best course of action is to wait for
the veto once the two-thirds majority is secured. Let the world

decide and scream that the world is bigger than five. Let those
five countries bear the shameful responsibility of rejecting it.

In light of the above, it will become clear that the United
Nations cannot survive in its current form. Provided that there
will be no progress until that conclusion is reached, it may be

sufficient to establish the facts alone.
To conclude, it is necessary to openly acknowledge the following facts: The UN has never been fair or active due to the
201

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

privileges built into its structure. We face today much more
pressing problems. The inevitable need for reform makes it-

self known. The UN cannot serve humanity or sustain itself
without addressing those needs. Hence the long-standing call
for reform. Yet the reform proposals, which are currently on
the table, focus on the narrow interests of individual states,
lose sight of the big picture due to the excess amount of detail

and their scope, and cause fresh divisions. The international community must work together on a comprehensive and

principled platform if the UN will be truly reformed. We must
refrain from creating new privileges and focus on the main
issues with a strategic mindset.
To make the United Nations fairer and more effective, it
is crucial to limit the Security Council’s mandate and to empower the General Assembly. To implement that reform plan,

however, it is necessary to focus on the question of veto powers. No reform will be possible unless and until the Security
Council’s permanent members are stripped of their veto powers. The most recent developments have clearly demonstrated
that abolishing the veto power is legally challenging, yet politically possible, if we do not lose our focus. The overwhelming
majority may find it difficult to agree on a positive agenda, yet
it is entirely possible to scrutinize the privileges that only five
nations enjoy. That is why the veto power must be the first
item on our agenda. The majority must come together and
endorse the following message: The world is bigger than five.

202

Conclusion

The international order is undergoing a critical transformation as we mark the 76" anniversary of the establishment of

the United Nations. Such anniversaries represent an opportunity to celebrate as well as to take stock. I sincerely hope
that the UN’s 76th age will create such an opportunity for the

world. Mankind faces many problems, starting with the COVID-19 pandemic, that impact its physical health, economy,
social peace and future. 170 million people around the world
require urgent care and protection at this time. The number of
starving people has exceeded 820 million, whereas more than
70 million people were forced to flee their homes due to vio-

lence and oppression. Unfortunately, the COVID-19 pandem-

203

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

ic severely deepened those injustices and inequalities. As the
world’s top provider of humanitarian aid based on national
income, Turkey does everything in its power to alleviate the
problems that the pandemic has caused.
During this period, we

delivered medical

supplies and

equipment to 146 nations around the world, irrespective of
their religious affiliation, language, race or continent, as we addressed the needs of our own citizens. The greed for excessive
wealth, the centralization of power and attempts to continue
colonialism through other means are the greatest obstacles to
the global system’s ability to promote justice. The consistent
lack of stability in certain parts of the world, starting with Syria, Palestine, Yemen and Afghanistan, attests to that fact.

Despite its self-proclaimed ideals, the UN system lacks
the effectiveness to prevent or end violent conflicts. At this
point, we all appreciate that humanity cannot overcome con-

temporary challenges with organizations shaped by the needs
of the last century. To restore the UN system’s effectiveness,
we must first subject the Security Council to certain reforms.

Indeed, the Council’s current structure, which leaves the fate
of nearly 8 million people to the mercy of five member states,

is neither fair nor sustainable.
To build a new Council, which will be democratic, trans-

parent, accountable, effective and representative, is no longer
a choice, but a necessity. At the same time, strengthening and
reviving the UN General Assembly, too, would significantly

contribute to the solution of pressing problems.
204

CONCLUSION

Keeping in mind the outcome of the COVID-19 pandem-

ic, it is clear that the global system faces a comprehensive
transformation. This phenomenon must also be viewed as a

fresh challenge. Transformations entail major challenges but
also create fresh opportunities. Each crisis is an opportunity

to learn from past incidents and to build back better.
This is neither the immediate aftermath of the Cold War
nor the end of World War I or World War II. A new world
is about to emerge. This new world contains elements of
multipolarism. That multipolarism will promote peace, secu-

rity and stability, however, is not a certainty. In this sense,
we need to act together, think together and design the future
anew to restore security and stability.

A quick look at the current state of the world, however,
unfortunately, reveals something akin to the lead-up to past
great wars. Indeed, this time around, the situation is far more
complex,

uncertain

and chaotic. Problems

like the global

pandemic, irregular migration, international terrorism, global warming,

starvation,

drought,

injustice,

unsustainable

growth, failed states and civil wars have come to threaten humanity. Most recently, inter-state tensions have been added

to that mix. Various phenomena, from trade wars and diplomatic tensions to the rise of racist and reactionary populism
and protectionism, suggest that a global conflict is more likely
than before. Since 2011, the Middle East and North Africa
have been the epicenters of violence, competition between
states and extremism.

Unfortunately,

the mechanisms

of
205

& ie We can only cope with such global
problems with global efforts.
Hence our insistence that we will
all be affected by global problems
in the absence of cooperation and
coordination.

CONCLUSION

global governance do not live up to their respective responsi-

bilities regarding the solution of those problems.
In truth, we must look for the reasons behind the current
tensions in the international arena with reference to their historical sources. This international order, which the West de-

signed after World War I according to its own interests, has never been fair or sustainable. Indeed, it could not generate peace
because it was built on unfair practices and oppression. Later,
humanity encountered the second great calamity — which was
one of the worst manmade catastrophes in history. Years later,
at the beginning of the 21° century, the international commu-

nity finds itself on the brink of catastrophe anew.

The most recent developments in the Islamic world support this view. Palestine has been fighting for survival for a
century amid oppression and unfairness. At the same time,

people in the Rakhine State, Syria and other conflict zones
have been taken hostage by their governments and international interventions.

One cannot possibly imagine that so

much oppression would not lead to a new global crisis. In the
Middle East, civil wars are raging within the borders of many
countries, which face a deep crisis. Such environments give

rise to problems like terrorism and migration, which remain
at the top of the global agenda. Indeed, many people, who are
unable to live with dignity in their native lands, find themselves compelled to relocate to safer parts. of the world. Some
end up being exploited by terrorist organizations. Others end

up losing their lives at sea. The suffering of a child, whose
207

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

small body washed up on our shores, thus breaks our hearts.
Yet we witness,

sadly, that those desperate people are

turned away by the Western states, who may be viewed as

the founders of this corrupt order. Even if they find a way to
enter those countries, they become the target of xenophobia
and even Islamophobia. Turkey hosts 4 million migrants due
to the Syrian civil war. The Western nations even ignore that
fact. Despite our repeated offers to work together on that issue, they have never really looked for a solution. Likewise,
our Western allies stuck to their hypocritical approach to terrorism, despite knowing that they, too, could be targeted by
terrorists at any time. Indeed, the problem of terrorism could
affect Turkey today and France or the United States tomorrow. We can only cope with such global problems with global
efforts. Hence our insistence that we will all be affected by

global problems in the absence of cooperation and coordination. That is why we need fairer and properly functioning international organizations.

We have no choice but to promote global justice. Turkey
will remain opposed, decisively, to all those injustices. It will
continue to pioneer the global effort to ensure peace and welfare. We will take necessary precautions to address security

issues, and spur economic growth and look for ways to institutionalize it. Our fight against terrorism is self-evident. We
are combating terrorist groups that aim to undermine our territorial integrity as well as terrorist entities that target all of

humanity.

208

CONCLUSION

Many organizations around the world were established in

the name of peace and stability. Yet they all face the dual problems of justice and functionality. Needless to say, the United

Nations is at the top of that list. The UN may have been established by the victors of World War II; yet, with its 193 members,
it is the most representative and legitimate organization in the
world today. Unfortunately, the organization fell short of expectations throughout its history — because it was built unfairly,
atop an already unfair international order. Hence its inability to
address humanity’s pressing problems in its current state.
For the record, we are not alone in voicing this opinion.
There have been reform efforts for decades, which ended up
being bogged down with fruitless discussions. Most of those

reform efforts were reduced to selfish proposals, such as the
admission of certain countries of specific regions into the Security Council. The more comprehensive proposals, in turn,

proved unable to focus on specific areas due to strategic blindness. Secondary issues were thus discussed at the expense of
the most vital questions.
Today, we argue that the question of reform must be engaged much more seriously. It may be too late unless we take
the necessary steps right away. Our position is that compre-

hensive, radical, principled and strategic proposals are need-

ed. For this purpose, we make our own proposal — which
strikes at the heart of the United Nations.

We posit that the Security Council must emerge out of
the General Assembly to address the problems of justice and
209

A

FAIRER

WORLD

IS

POSSIBLE

functionality. The Council’s members, we argue, must be se-

lected in turns and through a competitive process.
We also know, however, that the implementation of any reform plan depends on confronting the questions of permanent

membership and veto powers right away. All demands for reform are doomed to fail unless the veto power is opened to discussion and abolished. In this sense, the first order of business
is to abolish the veto power; hence our call for the organization
of meetings with broad participation and the deprivation of the
five permanent members of their veto powers.
It is our belief that this goal is perfectly attainable under
the right circumstances.

It is not difficult for all member

states, except the permanent members, to meet and discuss

a plan that they could support in principle. Provided that up
to 120 member states attended past meetings on reform, it is

certainly possible to hold a meeting with more than 130 nations who constitute two-thirds of the General Assembly and
to make a decision to abolish veto powers.
Obviously, that resolution may be vetoed by the Security
Council’s permanent members. Yet that reaction would effectively deprive the Council of all its legitimacy. That would be
a shocking and radical action.
Perhaps that is what humanity needs after all. Those privileged nations will never part with their privileges voluntarily
until the rest manage to come together. We cannot build a better
system until this unfair and dysfunctional order ceases to exist.

Hence our argument that privilege must be abolished, first and
210

CONCLUSION

foremost. We hereby note that we cannot leave the world to the
ambitions, interests and caprices of those five countries.
And we insist.on making the following point: “The world
is bigger than five.”

tia |
Mt cone Pn aacuar
SaasWwW eal nes

+ iis
aeie}bassviDyin chewet aes pveiadig's

i elpw ened pelle sete, 0 Ry a Re foe a
r
“lea,

ee

ie: ‘erttioin}as

wu! ae ay Nari

ee

st ee

i Ws ha al Roan ihabids tidal pie valet ae

FoR

hate ay ein iy

_-isioeoly ot
ual

nts

spe

-.

teitay chain ye

ia

4 ARR

hye

#59 ad

ord wae

bee :

oa
gal reli Wha
|

epee

N t ea

apffeh he

_

Sl

;

|

Wada eagle ant see

Tels

AS Hangarae Vidi

mdi

ae

Coa teehee

fa}

Boeke
rat iteSvit

Vek aan tt vt aa Sh piteind:
mY

ohatenga Wins vA
ety at ere ANY
uty

\ de oa

jis Ns

| ae
bias 5 9h

fae, 7)

Wey

eet ahh ite ihe
ieee

SHY a

eye lies rite

ORNs

PO

CV

ha ;

wy aah

pap itt SRALAVES a wbng ne

‘gatiey, errie

eetct

ad

eas

hth

=

Py

ak

“IT IS NEITHER

MORAL

FIVE NATIONS

TO MAKE

ISSUES THAT COULD
OF THE WORLD.
THAN

NOR

FAIR FOR JUST

DECISIONS

ON

INFLUENCE
THE FATE

THE WORLD

IS BIGGER

FIVE COUNTRIES.”

%
“To make global peace fairer and more sustainable,
we need the UN to reflect multiculturalism and multipolarism.
The world is neither unipolar nor bipolar. Nor is it under the
cultural hegemony of a dominant culture or a small number
of privileged stakeholders. It is possible to make the world
multipolar, multicentric, multicultural, more inclusive and fairer.

The UN is the primary place to accomplish that goal.
The UN reform is the path to peace, stability,

justice and effective global governance. Reforming the United Nations and, especially, restructuring the Security Council
- obviously require a global consensus.

Turkey has advocated a proposal to that effect for a long time
and opened it up for discussion. Our proposed solution manifests
itself in our motto: “The world is bigger than five.’
It calls for the implementation of a plan to restructure the
Security Council. Updating the Council to represent all
continents, faiths, backgrounds and cultures as fairly as possible
would be a revolutionary step toward finding solutions and
Uy)
ote)Coboteatea(o)or-¥ wrenTacoma
Recep Tayyip E rdogan

MNwy

197862571548

|

TURKUVAZ
KITAP

turkuvazkitap.com.tr VW turkuvazkitap

f turkuvazkitap

©) turkuvaz.kitap

