This manual is dedicated to all the
climate activists on the front lines
in their communities, those who

support them, and those interested
in taking action, because we need
everyone, everywhere, doing

everything, all the time, as quickly
as possible for climate justice!

–Jill MacIntyre Witt

Polar Pioneer Kayakivist Blockade. Seattle, WA, U.S. 2015. Used with permission.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

iii

INTRODUCTION

1

WHAT IS CLIMATE JUSTICE?

3

Definition
Overview
Theories
Frameworks and Principles
Economic, Social and Racial Justice
Strategies

3
6
8
11
13
15

SOCIAL MOVEMENT BUILDING

17

EFFECTIVE CLIMATE COMMUNICATION

35

CLIMATE ACTIVIST SURVEY

53

CLIMATE JUSTICE MOVEMENT BUILDING

73

CONCLUSION

89

APPENDICES

91

PHOTO CREDITS

105

END NOTES

108

REFERENCES

118

Defining Social Movements
Shifting Public Support for Change
Social Movement Building Strategies
Social Movement Approaches – Structure and Mass Mobilizations
Social Movement Building Tools

Messaging and Framing
Channels of Communication
Communication Strategies for Public Engagement
Barriers to Action
Effective Climate Communication Tips
Concepts
Constructs
Survey Questions
Data Collection Methods
Qualitative Data Analysis
Qualitative Data Response and Analysis
Limitations

Global Climate Action Origins
Global Justice Movement to Climate Justice Movement
Climate Justice Movement Development
Climate Justice Movement Building Today and Beyond
Climate Justice Movement Building Timeline

18
19
20
21
25

39
42
43
45
48
54
55
56
57
59
61
71
74
75
76
82
86

All content is available online: www.climatejusticenow.earth
i

We have the mind and
the heart and the spirit
at this point in time to change
the future, so that indeed
our future generations
will be able to experience
what you and I and our
ancestors have.
—JoDe Goudy, Yakama Tribal Council Chairman
(from remarks at Standing Rock, ND, U.S.)1

ii

Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my immense gratitude for the
guidance from each of my committee members. With
unwavering faith and support in my passion to make
a difference, Dr. Gene Myers gave me the nudge to
dream big and the encouragement to dive into the
Masters experience. Thank you to Dr. Nicole Brown,
through her wisdom in rhetoric and social change, she
provided me the curiosity, inspiration, and understanding that there are avenues to apply my activism with
my learning. With clarity of vision and steps towards
obtaining this degree, Dr. Steve Woods provided me
with a great deal of inspiration, backing and insight for
the need of contributing to the discourse on increasing
climate activism.
It is with a great deal of gratitude that I thank my advisor
and committee chair, Dr. Grace Wang for giving me the
direction, strength and courage to do a Masters project
while tackling the other parts of my life including parenting, teaching and organizing. I am thankful for her
wisdom and acceptance of my passion to continue my
other life’s endeavors and for her suggestions to keep
my project simple and succinct, while embracing my
additions and creative design elements for the manual.
I would also like to acknowledge Dr. Steve Hollenhorst,
Dr. Thomas Webler, Ed Weber, Kathy Patrick, Linda

iii

Solidarity on Cannonball River Bridge.
Standing Rock, ND, U.S. 2016. Used with permission.

D12 Protest. Paris, France. 2015.

iv

D12 Art Space. Paris, France. 2015.

Lovell, Kara Franklin, Jen VanderWeyden, Marli Williams, Blanche Bybee and Jessica Reading for their
integral roles and support with the 2015 October Climatefest. This event helped formulate my Masters
area of study and their support, guidance and faith
in me was deeply felt. I also would like to acknowledge Dr. Gigi Berardi because if it were not for her
continual nudging to get my Masters and her belief
in my capabilities, I would not have pursued this degree. She has taught me the power that anything is
possible when I put my mind to it. Thanks to my cohort for their unwavering support
throughout the program and Dr.
Nabil Kamel for stretching my
mind to the moon and giving me
whiplash on the way back.

further. I am thankful for our ah-ha moment together at the COP 21 Summit in Paris, where we walked
away saying that “we need everyone, everywhere
doing everything, all the time, as quickly as possible.”
This mantra has given me the daily fuel to power
through this project. Thanks too, to 350.org and Bill
McKibben for helping me believe in the value of
contributing to building the climate justice movement in this capacity and their support along the
way. Through being a climate change educator with
Climate Reality Project and an organizer for 350.org,
both organizations have helped
me realize that there is a gap between climate change education
and action along with a deep
sense of urgency to address the
crisis.

I would like to acknowledge the
global climate activists I met
in Paris for participating in the
survey research, along with the
Climate Reality Project for connecting Climate Reality Leaders
attending the Climate Summit
in Paris, of which many participated in my survey. Thanks to all
my climate activist friends that
participated in my test survey.
I can’t possibly list them all but
they know who they are. A huge
thank you to photographer and dear friend, Paul
Anderson, for capturing the climate justice movement on film.

Most importantly, I would like
to thank my family. First, Dennis
and Sherry Witt and Jack and
Eileen MacIntyre, for their continual support over the years for
both my activism and academic
work, along with tuition help. I
owe the biggest debt of thanks
to my life’s partner and best
friend, Craig Witt, for being my
sounding board, encourager,
and supporter through all of
the challenges, along with his never-ending editing
tips, suggestions, cooking and dish washing. I also
want to thank my two daughters, Olivia and Gloria
for giving me the inspiration to do all I can to help
move people to take climate action. It is for their
future and the future generations that feeds my passion to do this work.

Special thanks to several Climate Reality Leaders
who aided in the creation of my manual: Frederick
Stoss for his expert research help, Donna Thompson for her tireless and elaborate work on manual
design along with her sense of humor and sheer
determination for excellence, Doug Grant and Laura
Betts for their belief in my work and their financial
support, Seth Fleetwood for countless discussions in
helping me understand the impact that government
can have to bring about change through public
insistence which led to the focus of this manual, Harriet Sugarman for her inspiring example of dedication to this work and continued support in assuring
me that this project will be a valuable contribution,
Michael Foster for his unwavering commitment to
the movement that has inspired me to elevate the
conversation to lead others to direct action and
lastly Kat Haber for her gentle nudges to explore

Lastly, special thanks to those who continue doing all
they can to help solve the climate crisis. I am grateful to have received lessons from Indigenous leaders and elders on this journey which have provided
immense inspiration and guidance for shaping this
manual. One of the teachings I am grateful for receiving is, “we have the answers, if only they would
listen to us.” With that, please seek their guidance as
you move forth, while using this manual. All closeup photos were taken with permission from the subjects. Thanks in advance to all who find inspiration
and utilize any bits from this manual to move people
to act on climate. This manual is for you! Thank you
for making a difference.
v

“We need to
align climate
change ambition
with individual
and societal
aspirations.”
Survey Participant

vi

Introduction

Governments from around the world have been
meeting annually for over twenty years to determine
solutions for addressing global climate change. At
the Paris COP 21 Climate Summit in 2015, 195 countries agreed that carbon emissions must be lowered
and each country reported their Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) for lowering
carbon emissions. It is now up to civil society to hold
governments not only accountable to their commitment, but to also urge bolder action since their
intended contributions are not adequate to lower
emissions to a level suitable for a livable future. In
order for governments to act on climate change,
public insistence must grow with climate education
leading to action. A global justice movement focused on climate action can play a critical role to
move more people to act and thus in turn pressure
governments to take action.

Paddle to Paris. Paris, France. 2015.

The field manual is composed of the
following sections:

This project focuses on how to increase climate activism through a compilation of strategies and insights
in the form of a climate justice field manual to help inform individuals, grassroots organizers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), government agencies
and educators on ways to increase climate activism.

What is Climate Justice?
Social Movement Building
Effective Climate Communication
Climate Activist Survey
Climate Justice Movement Building

The main objectives addressed in this
manual are:

This manual helps bridge the gap between climate
education and climate action along with providing
some insights on the various components that can
help build a movement in order for organizations
to move people to climate action more effectively
and quickly. Make this manual yours, take notes, find
ideas that will work in your communities and most
importantly, act swiftly and boldly.

1. Identify what the climate justice movement can
apply from other social movements
2. Address the challenges of climate communication in order to build collective efficacy
3. Provide strategies or best practices to help engage people in climate activism
1

climate justice

[klahy-mit juhs-tis]

Climate justice is a term used for framing global warming as an ethical
and political issue, rather than one that is purely environmental or
physical in nature. This is done by relating the effects of climate to
concepts of justice, particularly environmental justice and social justice
and by examining issues such as equality, human rights, collective
rights, and the historical responsibilities for climate change.2
—

Wikipedia

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

2

What is
climate justice?
What is Climate Justice? This question will be
examined to provide some insights in terms of what
societies can do to urge their governments to take
bolder actions in addressing the changing climate.

Break Free 2016 Rally. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

Definition

The notion of justice requires that we ask about how fair or how just something is and who decides? In simple terms, the Merriam Webster dictionary defines ‘justice’ as “the quality of being just, impartial or fair.”1 The
notion of right and wrong and the ethical implications tie into the definition of climate justice. As defined in
Wikipedia, “Climate justice is a term used for framing global warming as an ethical and political issue, rather than one that is purely environmental or physical in nature. This is done by relating the effects of climate
to concepts of justice, particularly environmental justice and social justice and by examining issues such as
equality, human rights, collective rights, and the historical responsibilities for climate change.”2 How much of
the impacts of climate change are we willing to tolerate and adjust to, to make it a more just world?
3

As stated in the World Wildlife Fund 2016 Living
Planet Report, the world lost 58% of the planet’s
species between 1970 and 2012 and is on track to
lose 67% by 2020.3 Scientists confirm that human
activity is affecting biodiversity loss and claim we
have entered the 6th mass extinction period.4 For
some people, their very own survival is what’s
at stake. According to a recent case study, the
Quinault Indian Nation in Washington State is
making plans to relocate to higher ground, due
to the already felt climate change impacts of sea
level rise causing flooding over their community.5
For others, it seems there is a moral imperative to
consider the consequences of their actions.

China, which makes the U.S. the number one carbon
polluter when adding this measurement.7
To act on what is unjust in the world, defining
justice can play an essential role. When people
stand up to injustice, change happens as depicted
throughout history with building social movements. For example, the fight for women’s right to
vote, the battle for civil rights, and the recognition
of same sex marriage were won through citizen
pressure to change laws. According to Chenoweth
and Stephan, in order for change to occur, society
must be transformed to gain an understanding of
what is unjust – yet movements aren’t fought by
everyone.8

Is it just for countries to consume and produce more
carbon pollution at the expense of impacts to other
countries? For example, the U.S. has less than 5%
of the world’s population and uses around 25% of
the world’s fossil fuel reserves.6 U.S. carbon footprint
can also add the amount of CO2 measured as the
balance of emissions embodied in trade through
our high level of imports for products produced in

Forces of power and greed can influence the norms
of society or rather, have society controlled into
submission through the manufacturing of doubt.
According to Oreskes and Conway, the fossil fuel
industry invested in the same entities that manufactured doubt about the science that smoking was
detrimental to one’s health.9

4

Break Free 2016 Kayaktivist Action. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

Street Art. Seattle, WA, U.S. 2016. Used with permission.

This is why it is imperative that climate science help
people understand the human impacts on changing the climate. The fossil fuel industry doesn’t want
people to understand the harm caused by rising
carbon emissions. The industry’s power structures
manufacture doubt so people will get confused
and be less likely to act.10 Because of the ‘Fairness
Doctrine’ in the U.S., a policy requiring media to
present both sides of controversial information in
an equitable manner, the manufactured doubt has
received equal time in the media and “when every
voice is given equal time – and equal weight – the
result does not necessarily serve us well.”11 While
people’s perspectives on climate change have been
influenced by the fossil fuel companies, the impacts
related to climate change are becoming increasingly
apparent with unprecedented storms such as Hurricane Katrina and Sandy and the impacts they have
had on marginalized communities.12 The fossil fuel

industry is like slavery in terms of how it is ‘woven’
into our economic system, which poses many challenges and we must be willing to recognize and act
in the face of uncertainty.13 When people know what
is right and wrong, however, moral values can move
people to act.
Climate justice has evolved over time to help us
understand, “problems, solutions and pathways for
change. While climate justice is not the only useful
framework to engage the ecological crisis, it is especially meaningful when it is used in a specific framework, not as a vague marriage of concepts of justice
and climate action.”14 The evolution of climate justice is about understanding how impacts of human
caused climate change can create unjust results and
determining solutions through developing theories
and frameworks for climate justice to address the
problems in a just manner.
5

Overview

Scientists have been studying the
changing climate for several decades
and the consensus among nearly all
of them in recent years is that the
increase in greenhouse gas emissions
in our atmosphere is due to human
activity.15 While this is happening,
nations around the world have been
gathering annually for the United
Nations Climate Conference of the
Parties to address climate change,
known as the Conference of the Parties (COP). The COP has been meeting annually for over 20 years, with
no progress towards lowering carbon
emissions.16

COP 21 Messaging. Paris, France. 2015.

But for the first time in history, at the 2015 Paris COP21 Summit, 195 countries came to the agreement that
climate change must be addressed, and that all countries must take collective global action to keep global temperatures below a 1.5 oC rise.17 Each country was required to submit their own intended nationally
determined contributions (INDCs).18 The INDCs ensured that every country contributed to lowering carbon
emissions which would be part of the global effort. These contributions are only symbolic until results are
produced, yet Posner and Weisbach suggest that symbolic behaviors can have a positive impact.19 This symbolic behavior can lead more countries to commit and when “more and more people take actions on similar
goals, a sense may develop that enough people care about a problem to make substantive government
action possible.”20
Although the Paris Agreement aims to curb temperature rise to 1.5 oC, the United Nations Environment Programme 2016 Emissions Gap Report states a 3 oC rise trajectory is more likely.21 This is why citizen pressure
becomes necessary, to demand that governments take bolder and swifter action. People must act locally,
regionally, statewide, nationally and internationally to demand climate action. Posner and Weisbach contend
that in the United States, politicians find that the political concern for action doesn’t run deep, which produces inadequate laws that match the political will of the people.22
At the international level, just how much action each government should take has been the discussion
at the COP summits. Many nations in the Global South claim that they are not the ones responsible for
6

COP 21 Sarayacu Canoe Water Blessing with Lummi Nation. Paris, France. 2015.

creating the problem, yet are feeling the greatest
impacts. Countries in the Global North have been
reluctant to respond to the Global South. Doing so
would mean taking responsibility for their contribution to the climate pollution problem with no perceivable value set for the externalized costs of fossil
fuel production and combustion.

first time into the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change language.25
As we move forward collectively in communities,
regions, and countries, we must address the issue
of justice alongside the changing climate. Having
a deeper understanding of climate justice will help
enable communities’ leverage points for urging
their governments to take climate action. Climate
justice addresses social, racial, economic and
environmental justice all together. Many environmental justice battles, such as stopping large scale
damming projects that impact farmers and fisheries
or shutting down asbestos mining which impacts
communities’ health, have been fought in the 20th
century in regards to injustices caused by the projects. Yet, climate justice is a battle for our existence
which gives us a moral imperative to act. As Reverend Lennox Yearwood said at a No Dakota Access
Pipeline rally in Washington, D.C. in September
2016, “I know we fought for equality in the 20th
century…but the reality is that we are now fighting
for existence in the 21st century.”26

Many low-lying nations with coastal areas at or
near sea level are currently being swallowed up by
the rising seas, with the already recorded near 1 oC
temperature rise.23 Prior to the 2009 Copenhagen
COP summit, the government officials of the Maldives held an underwater cabinet meeting, sitting
on chairs at a table in full scuba gear, showing how
they might conduct meetings in the future if climate
change isn’t addressed.24 At the 2015 Paris COP
summit, it was the Indigenous voices from around
the world demanding that a 2 oC rise minimum
wasn’t enough to protect their future, and that the
target must only be a 1.5 oC rise limit if humans wish
to stay alive. Another breakthrough in Paris was the
inclusion of the concept of “climate justice” for the
7

Theories

Political philosophers have been determining theories of climate justice for about 20 years.27 Yet, as
the impacts of climate change increase, the central
focus of political theory has been on climate justice
in the last decade.28 Justice is a concern of both
moral philosophers and political theorists and political theories can provide potential ways to respond
to climate change.29
In considering climate justice on the international
scale, political philosophers have presented their
theories to see if they uphold to the justice principles created. John Rawls and Simon Caney are two
well-known political philosophers who have helped
identify principles or theories of justice. Rawls identifies justice as the primary virtue of social institutions whereby laws and institutions must continue
to be reformed or abolished if they are deemed
unjust.30 In general, Rawls contends that justice
does not allow for the losses to some in order to
provide gains for the greater good.31 In relation to
climate change, impacts created by those who consume more CO2 cause injustices by this consumption when the climate impacts are impacting communities that create the least amount of carbon
pollution. More specifically, Rawls suggests that “the
primary subject of justice is the basic structure of
society, or more exactly, the way in which the major
social institutions distribute fundamental rights and
duties and determine the division of advantages
from social cooperation.”32

to the particularities of the environment; (ii) explores the issues that arise from applying principles
at the global rather than the domestic level; and
(iii) explores the intergenerational dimensions of
global climate change.”33
Wealthy countries have a stake or interest in supporting the marginalized countries based on
the principle of “retributive justice” because they
caused the problems for the marginalized communities.34 Marginalized countries may not be able to
subsist with climate change impacts putting human
rights at stake. All nations will need to help whether
or not they have incurred human rights violations.
The principle of “distributive justice” considers that
all parties must pay for the costs due to climate
change.35 We can agree that it is our duty or moral
responsibility to act yet there is still debate or concerns about distributing responsibilities.36 The “polluter pays” principle is difficult to pursue because it
is difficult to gain support for the costs of damage
already done by people in the past, especially if
they have passed on.37 This leads us to the moral

Caney suggests that “an adequate theory of justice
in relation to climate change must explain in what
ways global climate change affects persons’ entitlements and it must do so in a way that (i) is sensitive
8

argument of the “ability-to-pay” principle, meaning
the wealthier countries have the ability.38

upon if they are pragmatic and deal with only what
is feasible.44 They argue that if “proposed principles
are not feasible, we should reject them.”45 Rawls suggests that we can’t follow climate justice principles
if they are beyond what is capable by humans, but
that we also can’t reject principles if they don’t seem
politically feasible.46

In addition, “procedural justice” considers who
makes decisions and on whose behalf and that all
impacted parties have a right to participate in the
decision making process.39 Another consideration is
“intergenerational justice”, how we leave the planet for future generations.40 In 2013, Robert Huseby
created an amendment to the “Law of the Peoples”
by Rawls to take into account future generations and
it provides a “more complete and integrated solution to climate justice.”41 Theories of justice that help
shape international policy and global governance
can provide starting points for governance at the
local level.42

Theories that fall towards the ends of the spectrum
of “non-ideal” theories don’t lead to feasible action.
He also suggests that “ideal” theories must include
a path or theory of transition. Political institutions
can use theory of transition to guide decisions
around “feasibility, legitimacy, stability and sustainability.”47 Theory of transition must include principles
of climate justice that are based on empirical and
moral grounds such that the result doesn’t create
more injustices. Bell adds that if the principles are
not accessible then the closest approximation to our
ideals is the next step.48 To put it simply, we need
governments to lead on reducing non-compliance
and we need those that can pay the most to pay,
Caney concludes.49

“Ideal” and “non-ideal” theories focus on feasibility concerns around climate justice in regards to
governments addressing climate change which Bell
offers a critique.43 Bell argues that Posner and Weisbach limit what is possible in climate justice by stating that treaties or agreements can only be agreed

9

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.

“Healing humanity
and the spirit of earth
requires that we
mine and contribute
our individual and
collective beauty.”
Survey Participant

10

Frameworks
and Principles

Industrialized
society must
redefine its
relationship
with the
sacredness of
Mother Earth

Understanding theories of climate justice help
build frameworks of principles that the world
can agree on before action can be determined.
Frameworks emerged to shift the debate from
technical or scientific to a more ethical perspective.50 Advocates of this shift felt that the scientific
debate hindered action and it was important to
come up with equitable policy solutions.51 The Bali
Principles of Climate Justice and the Ten Principles
for Just Climate Change Policies in the U.S. were
developed in 2002.52 These principles were created to help shape policy decisions. The United
Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights is
another framework of principles that help guide
global decision making for climate action. It was
created in 1948 and has been translated into 500
languages.53 The details of the principles listed
above can be found in Appendix A.

Indigenous
Environmental
Network
Principles of
Climate Justice
D12 Art Space. Paris, France. 2015.

1. Leave Fossil Fuels in the Ground

Different declarations have also been created by
various groups and have been shared widely. This
is an effort to not just define climate justice, but to
provide roadmaps forward. The Indigenous Environmental Network has Four Principles of Climate
Justice. It states that “Industrialized society must
redefine its relationship with the sacredness of
Mother Earth.”54

2. Demand Real and Effective Solutions
3. Industrialized – Developed Countries
Take Responsibility
4. Living in a Good Way with Mother
Earth55
11

12

All photos: People’s Climate March. Washington, D.C., U.S. 2017.

The theories of climate justice have been evolving
through dissection of both feasibility and accessibility to solutions. In addition, this evolution considers
other forms of justice including economic justice.
Economic justice, in the case of the Global South
is understood as the elevation of poor people out
of poverty through economic growth. This growth,
however, can lead to more climate pollution.

Economic,
Social and
Racial Justice

There is now evidence of poorer countries, such as
Bangladesh leapfrogging technologies while rising
out of poverty. According to a 2015 report by the
International Renewable Energy Agency, Bangladesh
has the highest per capita installations of solar panels than any other country—rising from 25,000 to
3.8 million systems in the last decade with their 2016
target at 6 million units.56 They didn’t need to install
national grids for energy, but rather have homes responsible for their own energy production and consumption. While climate justice includes economic
justice, it must also include social and racial justice.
Pioneering work by Robert Bullard first identified
the racial disparities in relation to environmental
pollution impacts in U.S. cities. For example, there is
a higher proportion of communities of color living
next to coal-fired power plants in America and they
end up bearing the brunt of the pollution impacts.
This is also true for toxic waste facilities and fossil
fuel refineries.57 This must be addressed when determining new policies for confronting pollution.
The world saw first-hand the devastating impacts of
Hurricane Katrina and how the disadvantaged were
displaced and not aided in reasonable time. The
communities did not have the vehicles nor the financial resources to evacuate in the first place and they
were not able to receive disaster relief.58 With the
changing climate, communities will face additional
impacts and the marginalized communities will be
the hardest hit, unless the injustices they currently
face are addressed.

Women’s March. Seattle, WA, U.S. 2017.

In essence, climate justice is an extension of environmental justice where the marginalized communities
are further disadvantaged due to climate change
impacts. Climate justice provides a sociological call
to action to address the social, racial, economic and
environmental injustices facing marginalized communities.
13

“I’m not going to
solve it alone.”
Survey Participant

14

Oyster Dome. Chuckanut Range, WA, U.S. 2015.

Strategies
Climate justice involves employing strategies to
build real solutions that are politically realistic
alongside strategies that stop the agenda of creating false solutions. The Indigenous movement
calls for long term solutions that take into account
future generations. Short term solutions can be
considered false solutions, under the guise of
‘emergency mode’ decision making.59 This entails
making a decision with the notion that we must
not let “perfect be the enemy of the good.”60

initiative was also touted as a ‘better than nothing’
approach.63 To better understand the process of
how we bring about change, we need to look at
what we need, what is politically realistic, the false
solutions that are created, and determine how
these overlap in order to design just policies.
In general, strategies involve bringing in the
climate justice principles and frameworks to help
communities address possibilities. Communities
don’t want to stop short of what may seem impossible. The vision of what is possible must be
shared and committed to, for example a fossil free
future. This may seem impossible, but if we fall
short of this on a global scale, then humanity has
lost. Justice involves standing up for the truth, and
activism is “about using your power and voice to
make a change in the world.”64 Citizens globally
must align and use their voices to address the
climate crisis.

So the question becomes what does ‘good’ really
mean? For example, in November 2016, a Washington State carbon tax initiative failed to take
into account the concerns from various sectors of
society.61 Communities of color aligned with labor,
social justice, and major environmental groups
to analyze how this initiative provided false solutions and attempted to stop the initiative as it was
proposed, before it headed to the ballot.62 The

15

Climate Action Zone. Paris, France. 2015.

16

Climate Action Zone. Paris, France. 2015.

Social
Movement
Building
Global surface temperatures have been the hottest
ever recorded with the 16 hottest records in the past
17 years, according to NASA.1 Scientific evidence
shows that there is increasing pressure to take
action on climate change, due to the increasing
temperatures. With ecological systems showing signs
of distress and nearing tipping points, building a
movement to force large scale change to address
climate change seems necessary.

What can the climate justice movement learn from past

successful social movements? Understanding what a social movement is provides a starting point towards
building a movement to address climate change.
This section of the manual provides a brief understanding of social movements and a compilation of successful mass mobilization movement strategies that can be implemented to help move citizens to act quickly on climate change. Because definitions of social movements are as diverse as the movements themselves,
looking at successful strategies from a variety of movements can provide insights that can apply to building
the climate justice movement. Understanding these strategies and tactics for building a movement can
provide insight for people, organizations, and cities to engage the public to take collective action in urging
governments (local, state, national) to take bolder action on climate.
17

Defining
Social Movements

According to Hall, social movements vary
greatly and have been defined by many different theorists and his definition takes into
account what he felt was missing in others’
definitions.2 Hall proposes the following
definition which includes the notion of tactics
and collective action: “A social movement
is a collection of people who organize to
change their environment, improve conditions, or resist change in their environment,
and who act collectively to achieve organizational goals.”3

What characterizes
a social movement
as a particular change
agent is its quality
as an articulated
and organized group.
—Piven & Cloward (1977)

COP 21 No Fracking Protest. Le Bourget, France. 2015.
18

Joseph Gusfield defines a social movement
as “socially shared activities and beliefs
directed toward the demand for change
in some aspect of the social order…What
characterizes a social movement as a particular change agent is its quality as an
articulated and organized group.”4 John
Wilson suggests that “a social movement is
a conscious, collective, organized attempt
to bring about or resist large-scale change
in the social order by non-institutionalized means.”5 Standard definitions of social
movements are missing a key feature of
protest movements which is disruption or
‘defiance’ because “defiance does not usually
characterize the activities of formal organizations that arise on the crest of protest
movements,” according to Piven and Cloward.6

Shifting
Public Support
for Change

D12 Art Space. Paris, France. 2015.

Hallmarks of social movements include Martin Luther
King Jr.’s (MLK) civil rights movement, Ghandi’s movement to help India break from colonial rule, and the
more recent gay rights movement. What is it that
these social movements and other successful social movements do to create change? According to
Chenoweth & Stephan, after studying 323 nonviolent and violent campaigns, both the frequency and
success rates of nonviolent campaigns increased.7

the Women’s March as the largest demonstration in
U.S. history on January 21, 2017.12 Although this is
historical in nature, many movements culminated on
that day to stand in unity and the future will only tell
its significance.13
The second component of active engagement is
voting. In societies where people have that opportunity, people voting with the movement is a sign
of active support. Third, active supporters persuade others through in person conversations or
postings on social media. Lastly, people who act
independently within their spheres of influence are
active supporters. “This might mean lawyers taking
on pro bono work for a cause they believe in, musicians writing songs that celebrate protesters in the
streets, teachers bringing lessons on the cause into
the classroom, ministers making it the topic of their
Sunday sermons, professional athletes or celebrities
being spotted in T-shirts that express their beliefs,
or store owners putting signs of support in their
windows.”14 Effective climate communication can
play a role in helping people act independently, thus
actively supporting the climate movement.

While creating broad public support is the objective
for a transformational movement, such as climate
justice, according to Chenoweth and Stephan, only
3.5% of the population needs to actually take a
stand and participate.8 Participation is defined as
“the active and observable engagement of individuals in collective action.”9 Active engagement or
support is comprised of several components, according to Engler and Engler.10 Having people show
up is first and foremost. This can come in many
ways of support such as attending marches, rallies,
phone banking and attending teach-ins.11 According
to a study by Chenoweth and Pressman, 4.2 million
people marched in more than 600 U.S. cities, slating
19

Social Movement
Building Strategies
One of the most famous 20th century scholars of
nonviolent action is Gene Sharp, who has had a
broad impact on social movement building and
became known as the leading advocate for strategic
nonviolence.15 In terms of a social movement seeking
a change that impacts political power, Sharp states
that nonviolent action can affect political power
that is pluralistic and fragile because it “depends on
many groups for reinforcement of its power sources
for governments that depend on people.”16 Political
power that is monolithic, usually involves violence to
bring about change.17 Sharp has, however, helped
countries change government structures with his
pamphlet, From Dictatorship to Democracy, which

has been translated into over thirty languages.18
Furthermore, Sharp has compiled a list of 198 methods of nonviolent action in order to impact political
power in a variety of ways (See Pages 28-30).19 The
“emphasis may be placed on being for or against
something; the grievances may be diverse; the group
to whom the act is primarily directed may vary; the
types of influence will differ; the intended result may
range widely; the act may be an independent one or
closely combined with some other method(s) of nonviolent action.”20 Descriptions of each method of nonviolent action and examples from around the world
are depicted in the second part of Sharp’s book, The
Politics of Nonviolent Action.

20

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.

Social Movement
Approaches—
Structure
and Mass
Mobilization

Alinsky’s 13 Rules of Power
Tactics When Organizing:
1. Power is not only what you have but
what the enemy thinks you have.
2. Never go outside the experience of your
people.
3. Wherever possible go outside the
experience of the enemy.
4. Make the enemy live up to their own
book of rules.

There are two general schools of thought in relation
to bringing about social change. Saul Alinsky’s landmark book, Rules for Radicals, paved the way with a
set of organizational structures that help build organizations not movements.21 He is known for his approach for building community groups through slow
and incremental steps, person to person relationship
building, careful leadership development and creating institutional bodies within organizations which
are stable with structure.22 The other main approach
is described through the influential work of Frances
Fox Piven as broad-based nonviolent disobedience
that comes together quickly in the form of mass
protest, according to Engler and Engler.23 “The future
of social change in this country may well involve
integrating these approaches – figuring out how the
strengths of both structure and mass protest can be
used in tandem – so that outbreaks of widespread
revolt complement long-term organizing.”24

5. Ridicule is man’s most potent weapon.
6. A good tactic is one that your people
enjoy.
7. A tactic that drags on too long becomes
a drag.
8. Keep the pressure on, with different
tactics and actions.
9. The threat is usually more terrifying than
the thing itself.
10. The major premise for tactics is the
development of operations that will
maintain a constant pressure upon the
opposition.
11. If you push a negative hard and deep
enough it will break through into its
counterside.

According to Alinsky, changing the system is only
possible through a supportive base of popular reformation versus simply denouncing an administration
and its policies. Reformation is defined as the point
when the general public is disillusioned and while
they may not act for change, they aren’t opposed
to those who do.25 Action or changes in the system, for the sake of policy changes come when the
pressure mounts and people keep the heat up and
“no politician can sit on a hot issue if you make it hot
enough.”26 It is critical in a democracy for people to
engage their politicians on the issues they feel need
to be addressed, such as climate change. “To lose
your ‘identity’ as a citizen of democracy is but a step
from losing your identity as a person.”27

12. The price of a successful attack is a
constructive alternative.
13. Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it,
and polarize it.
• The real action is in the enemy’s
reaction.
• The enemy properly goaded and
guided in his re-action will be your
major strength.
• Tactics, like organization, like life,
require that you move with the action.28
21

L-R: Divest Western Sit-In. Bellingham, WA, U.S. 2016; Global Climate March. Bellingham, WA, U.S. 2015; Global Climate March. Bellingham, WA, U.S. 2015.

“You’ve got to
use all of your strength
and keep going.”
Survey Participant

L-R: Global Climate March. Vancouver, B.C., Canada. 2015; Global Climate March. Bellingham, WA, U.S. 2015; Divest Western Sit-In. Bellingham, WA, U.S. 2016.
22

Disruptive power was introduced by Piven and Cloward in the book, Poor People’s Movements, where
case studies from successful movements in the
mid-20th century proved that poor people couldn’t
create change through conventional means.29 Piven
defends that ‘disruption’ is their key tool, characterizing disruption as “the breakdowns that resulted when people defied the rules and institutional
routines that originally governed life.”30 Disruption is
“simply the application of a negative sanction, the
withdrawal of a crucial contribution on which others depend, and it is therefore a natural resource
for exerting power.”31 Engler and Engler distinguish
between Alinsky’s approach and Piven’s by pointing
out that “formal structures failed to produce disruptive outbreaks but also that these structures usually
detracted from mass protest when it did occur.”32
Moving forward, social change can learn from the
past and integrate best practices, strategies and
tactics from a variety of approaches for change.

the poor was not in their ability to disrupt particular
institutions, but in the responses of electoral leaders to such disruptions.”33 The poor can impact how
elected leaders respond. Piven argues that disruptive tactics decline in a movement when organizers
look to build structure to sustain the movement in
hopes to affect the electorate, instead of escalating
disruption to create more pressure on the electorate.34 Piven also argues that disruptive movements
can shift the paradigm away from neoliberalism to
ideologies that are sympathetic for the poor which
can ultimately influence the electorate.35 If we are to
consider moving government to take bolder action
on climate change, Piven builds the case for incorporating disruptive protest and voices of the poor.
According to Cloward and Piven in their forward,
people are moved to take political action when
they are organized at the local level. People will act
collectively in their groups such as women, tenants,
peace activists, environmentalists and those found
in workplaces, neighborhoods and churches and
this is the most important point of mobilization.36

With the goal of urging governments to take bolder
action on climate change, the voice of the poor can
have an impact. According to Piven’s assessment of
poor’s involvement with disruption in the mid-20th
century issues, “The ultimate test of the power of

Strategies must include the escalation of momentum and impact of disruption during each stage

23

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

of movement building.37 Momentum-driven mass
mobilizations have two measures for measuring
success according to Engler and Engler.38 First, a
campaign must shift public opinion on the issue,
since the overall goal of transformation is gaining
popular support for the cause of the movement.
Second, a campaign must help build capacity to
further escalation of the movement.39 According to
Ivan Marovic, a key strategy is that you must create
and claim your victories along the way instead of
waiting for someone to either grant it or suggest
that someone must concede.40 It is the pressure
due to public support or shift in public opinion that
brings about the change.

This may be why perhaps Citizens Climate Lobby
hasn’t been successful in passing climate legislation
in the United States for many years. Their focus is
solely working on specific legislation instead of creating pressure to address the broad issue of climate
change. Creating a mass-mobilization movement
around shifting public opinion on the Keystone XL
Pipeline over several years of addressing its broad
climate change impacts as well as community and
health impacts ultimately led to an increase of pressure that forced President Obama to end the project
through executive order. The battle to stop Keystone
XL Pipeline was resurrected after the 2016 election
with a new executive order to resume the project.44

As in the case of MLK’s efforts, it was about creating change through the building of pressure on
broader issues and having the government respond
accordingly to that versus drafting proposals or
legislation to pass.41 MLK’s success can be attributed to premeditated strategy for both the 1956
Montgomery Bus Boycott and seven years later,
Project C in Birmingham, Alabama which aimed to
force Birmingham store owners and city officials to
desegregate the downtown.42 The seemingly unplanned, uncontrolled and emotional outbursts of
dogs attacking protesters in the streets of Birmingham swept through the media and caused outrage
around racial injustice which soon followed only a
year and a half later, the signing of the Civil Rights
Act into law.43

The strategy of showing personal acts of sacrifice, as
Ghandi professed, can activate public opinion. This
strategy forces people to choose what side to pick
and “makes people think and act.”45 Ghandi’s success displayed that system change can be accomplished by withdrawing cooperation, obedience and
submission of the masses.46 Some recent examples
include people chaining themselves to bulldozers to
not destroy sacred burial grounds, sitting in trees to
prevent deforestation, joining hunger strikes against
poor climate policy or locking down on railroad
tracks to prevent coal and oil exports. Nonviolent
movement building that incorporates disruption,
sacrifice and escalation has the greatest impact for
influencing change by awakening the general public
to see things different than the status quo.47
24

Bill Moyer argues that social movements are successful when the majority of the population is convinced that the movement represents “societies
positive and widely held values and sensibilities.”48
He also contends that it’s imperative that social
movements are nonviolent in order to be successful. During Moyer’s work of training activists in the
1980s, he found that there weren’t manuals for the
stages of movement building.49 He developed a
Movement Action Plan with 8 stages of social movement building to help empower activists (See Page
31).50 He also provides a road map for 4 key roles of
activists which are Citizen, Reformer, Change Agent
and Rebel (See Page 32).51

Social Movement
Building Tools

Additional Resources
for Organizing
Social Movements

Sociologist and activist George Lakey of Training for
Change has provided trainings for activists and has
a variation to Moyer’s 4 roles, with permission from
Moyer, which he labels as Rebel, Advocate, Helper,
and Organizer. (See Page 33).52 Lakey, along with
students from Swarthmore University, created an
online database of nonviolent campaigns around
the world for activists to gather strategies to apply
to their own campaigns (https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/).

Popular Resistance
https://popularresistance.org/
Waging Non Violence
http://wagingnonviolence.org/
The Change Agency
http://www.thechangeagency.org/

Today, many manuals and training materials have
been developed to provide strategies and tactics for
social movement building. Activist and writer Joshua
Kahn Russell has created an online resource library
for activists and organizers (See Appendix B).53

Organizing Cools the Planet
https://organizingcoolstheplanet.wordpress.com/
Organizing for Power
http://organizingforpower.org/
Beautiful Trouble
http://beautifultrouble.org/
The Metta Center
http://mettacenter.org/
Albert Einstein Institute
http://www.aeinstein.org/
Training for Change
http://www.trainingforchange.org/
The Ruckus Society
http://ruckus.org/
Backbone Campaign
http://www.backbonecampaign.org/
25

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

There is a plethora of examples of
nonviolent actions and strategies
to shift the public’s conscious
towards justice. It just takes
citizens to organize and come
up with tactics and strategies to
aid their campaigns and overall,
their movements to success.
Many movements take years to
propagate, develop and come to
fruition. The environmental justice
movement has fortunately laid
the groundwork for connecting
the dots between racial disparities
and impacts of environmental
pollution. Add in the refugee
crisis due to climate change and
the impacts on countries and
borders being crossed by millions
needing another place to live.
Also, farm workers having to
migrate with the changing climate
and not being able to work for
a livable wage or be harmed by
pesticides and unfair working
conditions. All these battles are
being fought and only become
more powerful and successful
when society connects the dots to
the injustices created by climate
change. Building a climate justice
movement has been developing
and will continue to grow when
the social, racial, environmental
and economical injustices are
inextricably interconnected.

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.
26

“Many people
believe they have
a lot to lose by trying.
This is the opposite
of the truth.”
Survey Participant
27

Pedregal Beach. Baja California Sur, Mexico. 2014.

198 Methods
of Nonviolent Action

c 25. Display of portraits
c 26. Paint as protest
c 27. New signs and names
c 28. Symbolic sounds
c 29. Symbolic reclamation
c 30. Rude gesture

THE METHODS OF NONVIOLENT
PROTEST AND PERSUASION
Formal statements
c 1. Public speeches
c 2. Letters of opposition or support
c 3. Declarations by organizations and institutions
c 4. Signed public statement
c 5. Declarations of indictment and intention
c 6. Group or mass petition

Pressures on individuals
c 31. “Haunting” officials
c 32. Taunting officials
c 33. Fraternization
c 34. Vigil

Communications with a wider audience
c 7. Slogans, caricatures, and symbols
c 8. Banners, posters, and displayed communications
c 9. Leaflets, pamphlets, and books
c 10. Newspapers and journals
c 11. Records, radio, and television
c 12. Skywriting and earth writing

Drama and music
c 35. Humorous skits and pranks
c 36. Performance of plays and music
c 37. Singing
Processions
c 38. March
c 39. Parade
c 40. Religious procession
c 41. Pilgrimage
c 42. Motorcade

Group representations
c 13. Deputation
c 14. Mock award
c 15. Group lobbying
c 16. Picketing
c 17. Mock election

Honoring the dead
c 43. Political mourning
c 44. Mock funeral
c 45. Demonstrative funeral
c 46. Homage at burial places

Symbolic public acts
c 18. Display of flags and symbolic colors
c 19. Wearing of symbols
c 20. Prayer and worship
c 21. Symbolic objects
c 22. Protest disrobing
c 23. Destruction of own property
c 24. Symbolic lights

Public assemblies
c 47. Assembly of protest or support
c 48. Protest meeting
c 49. Camouflaged meeting of protest
c 50. Teach-in
28

Withdrawal and renunciation
c 51. Walkout
c 52. Silence
c 53. Renouncing honors
c 54. Turning one’s back

Action by holders of financial resources
c 86. Withdrawal of bank deposits
c 87. Refusal to pay fees, dues, and assessments
c 88. Refusal to pay debts or interest
c 89. Severance of funds and credit
c 90. Revenue refusal
c 91. Refusal of government money

THE METHODS OF SOCIAL
NONCOOPERATION

Action by governments
c 92. Domestic embargo
c 93. Blacklisting of traders
c 94. International sellers’ embargo
c 95. International buyers’ embargo
c 96. International trade embargo

Ostracism of persons
c 55. Social boycott
c 56. Selective social boycott
c 57. Lysistratic nonaction
c 58. Excommunication
c 59. Interdict

THE METHODS OF ECONOMIC
NONCOOPERATION: THE STRIKE

Noncooperation with social events, customs,
and institutions
c 60. Suspension of social and sports activities
c 61. Boycott of social aff airs
c 62. Student strike
c 63. Social disobedience
c 64. Withdrawal from social institutions

Symbolic strikes
c 97. Protest strike
c 98. Quickie walkout (lightning strike)
Agricultural strikes
c 99. Peasant strike
c 100. Farm workers’ strike

Withdrawal from the social system
c 65. Stay-at-home
c 66. Total personal noncooperation
c 67. “Flight” of workers
c 68. Sanctuary
c 69. Collective disappearance
c 70. Protest emigration (hijrat)

Strikes by special groups
c 101. Refusal of impressed labor
c 102. Prisoners’ strike
c 103. Craft strike
c 104. Professional strike
Ordinary industrial strikes
c 105. Establishment strike
c 106. Industry strike
c 107. Sympathetic strike

THE METHODS OF ECONOMIC
NONCOOPERATION:
ECONOMIC BOYCOTTS

Restricted strikes
c 108. Detailed strike
c 109. Bumper strike
c 110. Slowdown strike
c 111. Working-to-rule strike
c 112. Reporting “sick” (“sick-in”)
c 113. Strike by resignation
c 114. Limited strike
c 115. Selective strike

Actions by consumers
c 71. Consumers’ boycott
c 72. Nonconsumption of boycotted goods
c 73. Policy of austerity
c 74. Rent withholding
c 75. Refusal to rent
c 76. National consumers’ boycott
c 77. International consumers’ boycott
Action by workers and producers
c 78. Workmen’s boycott
c 79. Producers’ boycott
c Action by middlemen
c 80. Suppliers’ and handlers’ boycott

Multi-industry strikes
c 116. Generalized strike
c 117. General strike
Combination of strikes and economic closures
c 118. Hartal
c 119. Economic shutdown

Action by owners and management
c 81. Traders’ boycott
c 82. Refusal to let or sell property
c 83. Lockout
c 84. Refusal of industrial assistance
c 85. Merchants’ “general strike”
29

THE METHODS OF POLITICAL
NONCOOPERATION

THE METHODS OF NONVIOLENT
INTERVENTION

Rejection of authority
c 120. Withholding or withdrawal of allegiance
c 121. Refusal of public support
c 122. Literature and speeches advocating resistance

Psychological intervention
c 158. Self-exposure to the elements
c 159. The fast
a) Fast of moral pressure
b) Hunger strike
c) Satyagrahic fast
c 160. Reverse trial
c 161. Nonviolent harassment

Citizens’ noncooperation with government
c 123. Boycott of legislative bodies
c 124. Boycott of elections
c 125. Boycott of government employment and positions
c 126. Boycott of government departments, agencies, and
other bodies
c 127. Withdrawal from government educational institutions
c 128. Boycott of government-supported organizations
c 129. Refusal of assistance to enforcement agents
c 130. Removal of own signs and placemarks
c 131. Refusal to accept appointed officials
c 132. Refusal to dissolve existing institutions

Physical intervention
c 162. Sit-in
c 163. Stand-in
c 164. Ride-in
c 165. Wade-in
c 166. Mill-in
c 167. Pray-in
c 168. Nonviolent raid
c 169. Nonviolent air raid
c 170. Nonviolent invasion
c 171. Nonviolent interjection
c 172. Nonviolent obstruction
c 173. Nonviolent occupation

Citizens’ alternatives to obedience
c 133. Reluctant and slow compliance
c 134. Nonobedience in absence of direct supervision
c 135. Popular nonobedience
c 136. Disguised disobedience
c 137. Refusal of an assemblage or meeting to disperse
c 138. Sitdown
c 139. Noncooperation with conscription and deportation
c 140. Hiding, escape, and false identities
c 141. Civil disobedience of “illegitimate” laws

Social intervention
c 174. Establishing new social patterns
c 175. Overloading of facilities
c 176. Stall-in
c 177. Speak-in
c 178. Guerrilla theater
c 179. Alternative social institution
c 180. Alternative communication system

Action by government personnel
c 142. Selective refusal of assistance by government aides
c 143. Blocking of lines of command and information
c 144. Stalling and obstruction
c 145. General administrative noncooperation
c 146. Judicial noncooperation
c 147. Deliberate inefficiency and selective noncooperation by
enforcement agents
c 148. Mutiny

Economic intervention
c 181. Reverse strike
c 182. Stay-in strike
c 183. Nonviolent land seizure
c 184. Defiance of blockade
c 185. Politically-motivated counterfeiting
c 186. Preclusive purchasing
c 187. Seizure of assets
c 188. Dumping
c 189. Selective patronage
c 190. Alternative market
c 191. Alternative transportation system
c 192. Alternative economic institution

Domestic governmental action
c 149. Quasi-legal evasions and delays
c 150. Noncooperation by constituent governmental units
International governmental action
c 151. Changes in diplomatic and other representation
c 152. Delay and cancellation of diplomatic events
c 153. Withholding of diplomatic recognition
c 154. Severance of diplomatic relations
c 155. Withdrawal from international organizations
c 156. Refusal of membership in international bodies
c 157. Expulsion from international organizations

Political intervention
c 193. Overloading of administrative systems
c 194. Disclosing identities of secret agents
c 195. Seeking imprisonment
c 196. Civil disobedience of “neutral” laws
c 197. Work-on without collaboration
c 198. Dual sovereignty and parallel government
30

Eight Stages
of the Process
of Social Movement
Success

1. Normal Times
• A critical social problem exists that
violates widely held values
• Powerholders support problem: Their
“Official Policies” tout widely held values
but the real “Operating Policies” violate
those values
• Public is unaware of the problem and
supports powerholders
• Problem/policies not a public issue

3. Ripening Conditions
• Recognition of problem and
victim grows
• Public sees victim’s faces
• More active local groups
• Need pre-existing institutions
and networks available to new
movement.
• 20 to 30 percent of public
opposes powerholder policies

2. Prove the Failure
of Official Institutions
• Many new local opposition
groups
• Use official channels — courts,
government offices,
commissions, hearings, etc. —
to prove they don’t work
• Become experts; do research

PROTESTS

• Focus more on other sub-goals • Spin off new social movements

Eight Stages of the Process of
Social Movement Success
CHARACTERISTICS OF MOVEMENT PROCESS
• Social movements are composed of many sub-goals and
sub-movements, each in their own MAP stage
• Strategy and tactics are different for each sub-movement,
according to the MAP stage each is in
• Keep advancing sub-movements through the Eight Stages
• Each sub-movement is focused on a specific goal (e.g., for
civil rights movements: restaurants, voting, public
accommodation)
• All of the sub-movements promote the same paradigm shift
(e.g., shift from hard to soft energy policy)

POWERHOLDERS

Public Must be Convinced Three Times
1. That there is a problem (Stage Four)
2. To oppose current conditions and policies (Stages Four, Six,
Seven)
3. To want, no longer fear, alternatives (Stages Six, Seven)

8. Continuing the Struggle
• Extend successes (e.g., even stronger civil rights laws)
• Oppose attempts at backlash
• Promote paradigm shift
• Focus on other sub-issues
• Recognize/celebrate successes so far

4. Take Off
• TRIGGER EVENT
• Dramatic nonviolent actions/campaigns
• Actions show public that conditions and
policies violate widely held values
• Nonviolent actions repeated around country
• Problem put on the social agenda
• New social movement rapidly takes off
• 40 percent of public opposes current
policies/conditions

5. Perception of Failure
• See goals unachieved
• See powerholders unchanged
• See numbers down at demonstrations
• Despair, hopelessness, burnout,
dropout, seems movement ended
• Emergence of negative rebel

6. Majority Public Opinion
• Majority oppose present conditions and
powerholder policies
• Show how the problem and policies affect all
sectors of society
• Involve mainstream citizens and institutions in
addressing the problem
• Problem put on the political agenda
• Promote alternatives
• Counter each new powerholder strategy
• Demonology: Powerholders promote public’s
fear of alternatives and activism
• Promote a paradigm shift, not just reforms
• Re-trigger events happen, reenacting Stage
Four for a short period

7. Success
• Large majority oppose current policies and no longer fear alternative
• Many powerholders split off and change positions
• End-game process: Powerholders change policies (it’s more costly to continue old
policies than to change) are voted out of office, or slow, invisible attrition
• New laws and policies
• Powerholders try to make minimal reforms, while movement demands social change

31

Four Roles of Social Movements
CITIZEN
•

•
•
•

•
•
•

Effective
Promotes positive Amencan
values, principles, and
symbols, e.g., democracy,
freedom, justice,
nonviolence
Normal citizen
Grounded in the center of
society
Promotes active citizen-based
society where citizens act with
disinterest to assure the
common good
The active citizen is the source
of legitimate political power
Acts on “confirmatory bias”
concept
Examples: King and Mandela

REFORMER

Ineffective
• Naïve citizen: Believes the
“official policies” and does not
realize that the powerholders
and institutions serve special
elite interests at the expense
of the majority and the
common good
OR
• Super-patriot: Gives automatic
obedience to powerholders
and the country

•

•
•
•

•

REBEL
Effective
• Protest Says "NO' to violations
of positive, widely held human
values
• Nonviolent direct action and
attitude; demonstrations,
rallies, and marches including
civil disobedience
• Target: Powerholders and
their institutions, e.g., government, corporations
• Puts issue and policies in
public spotlight and on
society’s agenda
• Actions have strategy and
tactics
• Empowered, exciting, courageous, risky, center of public
attention
• Holds relative, not absolute,
truth

Effective
Parliamentary: Uses official
mainstream system and
institutions – e.g., courts,
legislature, city hall, corporations – to get the movement's
goals, values, alternatives
adopted into official laws,
policies and conventional
wisdom
Uses a variety of means:
lobbying, lawsuits, referenda,
rallies, candidates, etc.
Professional Opposition
Organizations (POOs) are the
key movement agencies
Watchdogs successes to
assure enforcement, expand
successes, and protect against
backlash
POOs nurture and support
grassroots

Ineffective
• POOs: Dominator/patriarchal
model of organizational
structure and leadership
• Organizational maintenance
over movement needs
• Dominator styte undermines
movement democracy and
disempowers grassroots
• POO “Realistic Politics”:
Promotes minor reforms
rather than social changes
• POO co-optation: Staff
identify more with official
powerholders than with
movement grassroots

CHANGE AGENT
Effective
• Organizes People Power and
the Engaged Citizenry,
creating participatory democracy for the common good
• Educates and involves the
majority of citizens and whole
society on the issue
• Involves pre-existing
mass-based grassroots
organizations, networks,
coalitions, and activists on the
issue
• Promotes strategies and
tactics for waging long-term
social movement and Stage
Six
• Creates and supports grassroots activism and organizations for the long term
• Puts issue on society's political
agenda
• Counters new powerholder
strategies
• Promotes alternatives
• Promotes a paradigm shift

Ineffective
• Authoritarian anti-authoritarian
• Anti-American, anti-authority,
antiorganization structures
and rules
• Self-identifies as militant
radical, a lonely voice on
society's fringe
• Any means necessary:
Disruptive tactics and violence
to property and people
• Tactics without realistic
strategy
• Isolated from grassroots
mass-base
• Victim behavior: Angry,
dogmatic, aggressive, and
powerless
• Ideological totalism: Holds
absolute truth and moral,
political superiority
• Strident, arrogant egocentric;
self needs before movement
needs
• Irony of negative rebel:
Negative rebel similar to
agent provocateur
32

Ineffective
• Too utopian: Promotes visions
of perfectionist alternatives in
isolation from practical
political and social action
• Promotes only minor reforms
• Movement leadership and
organizations based on
patriarchy and control rather
than participatory democracy
• Tunnel vision: Advocates
single issue
• Ignores personal issues and
needs of activists
• Unconnected to social ond
political social change and
paradigm shift

Four Roles Relating to Change

Four Roles Relating to Change
by George Lakey with thanks to social activist and strategist Bill Moyer

INEFFECTIVE
INEFFECTIVE
Believes charity can handle
social problems, or that
helping individuals can
change social structures
Focuses on casualties and
refuses to see who benefits
from victimization
Provides services like job
training which simply give
some people a competitive
edge over other people,
without challenging
the scarcity which gives
rise to competition

EFFECTIVE

EFFECTIVE

Assists people in
ways that affirm
their dignity
and respect

Uses mainstream institutions like courts, city hall,
legislatures to get new
goals and values adopted

Shares skills and brings
clients into decision-making
roles

Uses lobbying, lawsuits,
elite networking/coalitionbuilding for clearly-stated
demands, often backed by
research

Promotes domination by
professional advocacy groups
that are top-down, patriarchal
and are more concerned about
organization's status than the
goal of their social movement
(such agencies can undermine
democracy in movement and
disempower the grassroots)

Monitors successes to
make sure they are
implemented

Does not like paradigm shifts

Educates about the
larger social system
Encourages experiments
in service delivery
which support liberation

helper
rebel
INEFFECTIVE

EFFECTIVE
Protests: says "no!" to
violations of positive
American values

Attached to an identity
as lonely voice on society's fringe

Employs nonviolent
direct action and attitude,
including civil disobedience

Uses tactics without
realistic strategy
Has victim attitude, behavior:
angry, judgmental, dogmatic

Identifies more with powerholders than with grassroots

advocate
organizer

Promotes anti-American, antiauthority, anti-organization
rules and structure

Promotes change by "any
means necessary"

"Realistic politics'':
promotes minor reforms
acceptable to power-holders

Uses strategy as
well as tactics

Can be strident: personal
upset more important than
movement's needs

Shows in behavior
the moral superiority
of movement values

Has tunnel vision:
advocates single approach
while opposing those doing
all others

Chooses strategies for
long-term movement
development rather than
focusing only on
immediate demands

Puts problems &
policies in public spotlight

Does work that is
courageous, exciting, risky

INEFFECTIVE

Believes in people power:
builds mass-based grassroots groups, networks
Nurtures growth of
natural leaders

Targets power-holders
and institutions

Uses rhetoric of selfrighteousness, absolute
truth, moral superiority

EFFECTIVE

Uses training to build
skills, democratize
decisions, diversify and
broaden organization and
coalitions
Promotes alternatives
and paradigm shifts

33

Promotes patriarchal
leadership styles
Promotes only minor reform
Stifles emergence of diversity
and ignores needs of activists
Promotes visions of
perfection cut off
from practical political
and social struggle

“I believe deeply that
human beings are meant to
fight for what they love
and always do so as individuals
and so now we have a chance
to do so collectively. ”
Survey Participant

34

People’s Climate March.
New York City, NY, U.S. 2014. Used with permission.

Effective
Climate
Communication
Understanding communication struggles and solutions
towards effective communication around climate
change is critical for building the climate justice
movement. Climate communication as an area of
interdisciplinary study has been growing considerably
in the past 10 years, yet continues to face challenges
of sharing this information with communicators,
organizers and educators.1

Effective climate communication is critical since public awareness and

knowledge about climate change hasn’t generated the level of response necessary for addressing the level
of the threat climate change poses.2
History has shown us, however, that rapid change in individual behavior can occur. “Stricter laws, penalties
and enforcement measures related to smoking, seat belts, drunk driving and littering…led to rapid increases
in seat-belt use and actual reductions in smoking, drunk driving and littering.”3 Knowing that policies have
35

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.

36

helped with rapid individual behavior change,
climate change poses a complex set of challenges
that have proven to be difficult to create policy toward change. The complex challenges are evident
by a crisis that crosses boundaries and political
differences along with changing climate impacts,
continued debates over cost coverage, and lack
of political will by the people since the crisis isn’t
visibly on the forefront of people’s minds. The Paris
Agreement provides hope for governmental efforts
to support carbon reductions across the globe.
Under the new Trump administration in the United States, however, it may prove to be difficult to
create and pass measures to reduce carbon reductions. Knowing this, it is clear that cities and states
will need to lead on this issue. This will require
citizens to demand local and state action.

of encouraging and fostering action, and practical available solutions to the problems requiring
change.”4 Effective climate communication influencing these conditions can help drive social change.
Climate communication has been extensively
studied in recent years to provide insight in both
barriers and effective strategies towards taking action at the individual level and collectively. Climate
communication research is appearing in over 400
different journals and other outlets, which provide
effective climate communication tips and strategies.5 In 2015, climate communication reached a
profound level of broad public outreach globally
with the release of the Pope’s Encyclical, Laudato
Si’, “with its particular focus on climate change, accentuating the cultural and moral turn in communication practice witnessed over the past 5 years.”6
The Encyclical, along with the Paris Agreement,
provide hope and direction towards climate action
and a call or mandate to act and act swiftly. While
there is no set prescription towards effective climate communication as the issue is very complex, I
will address how more effective communicators can
help move people to climate action.

Effective climate communication can help direct
the conversations towards collective action. According to Leiserowitz, Parris and Kates, to increase
collective action on climate change, the following
conditions are required: “changes in public values
and attitudes, vivid focusing events, an existing
structure of institutions and organizations capable
37

“We should use the
techniques of marketing to
sell the idea of what a better
lifestyle could be had if we
switched to a healthy, more
environmentally friendly
lifestyle, sell the benefits as
opposed to hitting people
with the problems
all the time.”
Survey Participant
38

Messaging and Framing

No Coal Exports Rally. Seattle, WA, U.S. 2015.

Communication and rhetoric around climate change
plays a key role in helping people understand the
climate crisis as well as how we deliberate and advocate to implement solutions, according to Endres
and DuPont.7 They state further that “we need to
think about and understand issues of framing that
affect the way people engage with climate change
and the environment.”8 Studies have shown that
apocalyptic messaging has not been effective in
moving people to action because of the “paralysis
that can happen in the face of such a large, complex
intergenerational issue.”9 In terms of increasing the
number of citizens to become active on climate and
build the climate justice movement, effective climate
communication with messages of hope is imperative.10 Hope may counteract despair and encourage
action, and create a sense that people can make a
positive difference.11 In addition, climate communication that focuses on strategies and solutions helps
foster the belief that the problem of climate change
is solvable which then increases the perception that
the problem is important.12 Patt and Weber also

found that when people see that solutions to climate
change are possible, they are more likely to accept
that it’s a problem in the first place.13 This provides
the case of the importance of sharing solutions in
climate communication rather than framing climate
change in the context of a problem. “It is also important to emphasize the fact that every human being has the capacity to make a difference in fighting
climate change.”14
Climate communication is most effective if it is a
two-way dialog with messages or framings specific
to the audience, in order to have people with varying values to be heard and be part of the contribution to the societal response.15 Communicating the
science of climate change creates a rift between the
listener and the speaker because the listener doesn’t
take ownership of the information and it’s still left to
the experts.16 One of the most effective methods of
increasing climate activism is by discussing the issue
with family and friends since people are more influenced by those they know.17
39

According to Moore and Russell, it’s important to
connect actions and events with meaning for people
because, “if something is meaningful, people believe
it to be true.”18 People will believe their facts, wherever they learn them and it’s important to meet people
where they are at, in relation to their knowledge of
climate change. The stories or narratives that we
communicate can make meaning from these facts.
“Communication experts now point increasingly to
the importance of story-telling and using narrative
formats to convey climate change.”19 To move people
to action, there must be meaning behind their truth
that will propel them to act.20 Furthermore, people
are more motivated to act if their concern is brought
about through personal experience that has an
emotional impact versus having a concern driven by
intellectual understanding.21

ous values, beliefs, world views and group identities.
Climate deniers or conservatives are more likely to
be persuaded by messages that are patriotic or the
impact of their action can improve health or save
money.23 Climate action programs using messages
that focus on local or immediate climate impacts
versus global or future impacts, along with adding
health and economic concerns, can increase participation or action.24 Messages that involve sharing
the uncertainty or risk of unstable oil supply moves
people towards supporting climate policy without
necessarily understanding climate change.25
Communication that highlights co-benefits to a
community, such as development (economic and
scientific advancement) and benevolence (moral and
caring) further engages a community to influence
governmental action, regardless of their ideological
divides, according to Bain et al.26 Communicating with inclusive words like ‘we’ and ‘us’ can shift
perceptions and increase support for a normative
vision within groups and increase intentions to act27.
According to a study by Shi, Visschers and Siegrist,
people were more inclined to change their behaviors when climate communication included more

“The values we hold affect not only our perceptions
and interpretations of the climate and our acceptability of climate science, but—crucially, and often
more prominently—the acceptability of anticipated
or proposed behavioral changes, technological solutions, or climate policies.”22 Tailoring communication
to reach a specific audience matters because of vari-

Women’s March. Seattle, WA, U.S. 2017.
40

climate friendly behaviors people could take, and
less inclined to change when the communication
was providing more knowledge about the negative consequences of climate change.28

According to Dr. Robert Bullard, it’s important how
we frame and communicate problems as well as
who is the messenger. Bullard states that “presenting the information is perhaps as important as the
information itself. I have said this many times that
the people of color, who are in positions of power,
in academia and elsewhere, need to come forward as messengers.”31 Bullard also suggests that
equity be given equal weight to science in climate
communication while also focusing on current impacts that are effecting populations today.32 Messaging that includes “recognition of the interconnections between environmental destruction and
systems of oppression” are essential contributions
to “creating a just and sustainable world,” otherwise we are just solving climate change without
addressing justice.33

Furthermore, communications with framing that
expresses environmental protection as protecting
a way of life or making society a better place can
increase environmental citizenship amongst skeptics and conservatives.29 Moving climate deniers
through effective climate communication is also
possible. “Framing climate change action in terms
of producing greater interpersonal warmth or societal development was more effective in promoting environmental citizenship than a frame focusing on the reality and risks of climate change, and
this was particularly the case for deniers.”30

41

D12 Rally. Paris, France. 2015.

Channels of
Communication

While people are moved to action through personal connections to others and to local impacts, other
channels of communication can also have an influence
on public perception of climate change. In the U.S.,
manufactured doubt about climate change by the fossil
fuel industry penetrated mainstream media channels,
according to Oreskes and Conway.34 “Journalists were
constantly pressured to grant the professional deniers
equal status – and equal time in news print space –
and they did.”35 This has created an uphill battle for
scientific knowledge to be trusted by the public even
when 97% of scientists agree that global temperatures
are increasing due to human activity.36 “Manufacturing
doubt about the scientific consensus on climate change
is one of the most effective means of reducing acceptance of climate change and support for mitigation
policies.”37 Researchers have found that when the 97%
scientific consensus is communicated to the public,
climate change acceptance increases, especially among
conservatives.38 All channels of communication can
increase trust from their readers or their audience by
referring to the scientific consensus on anthropogenic
global warming.

foster empathy, change attitudes, and increase receptivity to policy alternatives.”39 How the dialog can be
shifted by specific social, psychological and cognitive
processes involved is still being examined.40 Furthermore, Kahan suggests that for communicators about
science to be more effective, they must consider the
evidence-based methods of integrating communication science into their messaging.41 “If communication
researchers want climate communication to be as
effective and impactful as it could be, their work must
connect more effectively with those who do most of
the talking (climate scientists, policy-makers, advocates
in all sectors of society, journalists, editors, and public
intellectuals).”42 To be a more effective climate communicator, it is essential to have the latest knowledge
from the researchers who should make that connection
happen, according to Moser.43 Furthermore, Moser
states, “because climate change affects everything
and everyone everywhere, effective communication
about it should involve and reach across disciplinary,
sectoral, and geographic boundaries, aiming to reach
colleagues wherever they work.”44

Over the past 5 years, researchers have found that
channels of communication that are not just information presented but rather through dialog and “deliberative processes can open minds, deepen understanding,

42

D12 Art Space. Paris, France. 2015.

Communication Strategies
for Public Engagement

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

Along with effective communication, it is important to foster the sense that it is a social norm to
act on climate change through public engagement, especially in relation to policy support.45 A
social norm, in relation to climate change, is when
it becomes the norm in society to take action on
climate change. Norms can “refer either to what
is commonly done-that is, what is normal-or to
what is commonly approved-that is, what is socially
sanctioned.”46 Social norms are powerful sources
of influence and play an important role in human
decision-making.47 Societal transformation to take
action on climate change through collective action
has proven to be successful and thought to be required by a broad consensus.48 They state that this
collective action framework, based in a social norm
context, could involve community-based initiatives
as well as protest movements. People are more
motivated to engage in collective action if is conceptualized as a social norm.49

Communicating the contributions of personal behaviors to collective action to reduce global warming may be a powerful motivator for people to take
personal action, according to Roser-Renouf, Atkinson, Maibach and Leiserowitz.50 Once people start
acting on an individual level, they begin to advocate and show interest in policy changes. Some will
become influencers of policy change and others will
join advisory councils.51 Individual actions lead people to support action at the community level.
Recent research focusing on the impact of messaging around health impacts that are harming people
now and not in the future are more likely to support
climate policies.52 “A large literature in the field of
health and risk communication points to an individual’s personal sense of risk as the most powerful motivator of behavioral change.”53 A health frame can
move more people to support climate policy than
using the environmental frame since health values
are more widely held.54 Also, it’s important to plan
43

Divest Western March. Bellingham, WA, U.S. 2016.

your messaging based on the audience’s beliefs on
climate change. For example, “disengaged climate
change believers might pay attention to climate
change messages framed in terms of public health,
whereas climate deniers might respond negatively
and radically to those messages framed in terms of
national security.”55

wisdom on the issue of climate change.”58 Communicators can increase climate action by sharing
messages that consumer activism is a person’s
responsibility for creating change. Encouraging
consumer activists to share their opinions with
others can have a much greater impact versus
their individual purchases because their opinions
influence others around them.59 Furthermore, it
is important that consumer choices aren’t substituted for collective action.60 People will still need
to demand climate policies. “Public policies drove
consumer choices in the case of taxing cigarettes
and for carbon pollution. If policy could make polluting financially and socially unfavorable, this could
change consumer habits.”61

Businesses can also shift public opinion by the
commitments they make in becoming more sustainable.56 Effective climate communication can also
include the impact that the market can have as a
messenger for change since ‘money talks.’57 “Money tells us what we value, what we cherish and the
challenge is to “teach” our markets to speak with
44

Barriers to Action
Part of effective climate communication is addressing barriers to climate action. “While we strongly
believe that better understanding has an important
role to play, communication that does not keep
barriers to behavior and social change in mind is unlikely to be effective or sufficient.”62 Individual barriers
to climate action such as a lack of knowledge, belief
that it won’t make a difference, not having enough
time or money, how others would view them, skepticism, and fatalism are identified in a study by
Semenza et al.63 Barriers to public engagement on
climate change include: low public awareness, low
awareness on climate change consensus, viewing
climate change as a distant issue, belief that it is
the responsibility of government or industry and
not individual were identified by Whitmarsh, O’Neill
and Lorenzoni.64 Moser and Dilling identified cognitive, psychological and technical barriers along with
organizational inertia and resource constraints, lack
of peer support, lack of political will and leadership.65
The main themes in the literature on moving people to climate action suggest that effective climate
communication, increasing public engagement and
building collective action will help address these barriers to action, and provide key strategies to increasing public support and action.

In terms of collective action, the participants’ campaign messages or framing used regarding climate solutions at the Copenhagen COP 15 Climate
Summit was the focus of the survey studied by
Wahlström, Wennerhag, and Rootes.66 Most of the
protesters stated that change ought to be a result
of individual behavior followed by legislative or
policy changes while few named solutions involving systems change or global justice.67 Considering
the findings from this previous study, this research
project also includes an analysis of a survey (Climate Activist Survey) given to climate activists that
attended the Paris COP 21 Climate Summit. The
Climate Activist Survey provides a collection of
qualitative data in the form of written responses to
questions on current climate activism, future climate
activism and barriers to climate action. The responses are categorized into themes or constructs
of climate actions and barriers based on the themes
previously identified in the research. An analysis of
the data includes total number of similar constructs,
patterns, and correlations. This analysis may validate
findings in the literature regarding climate action
strategies and identify which strategies to put into
action in the future as well as identify current barriers to climate action.

45

COP 21 Billboard. Paris, France. 2015.

Locations
around
Paris where
activists
gathered
during the
COP21
Summit

D12 Art Space. Paris, France. 2015.

46

Place to B. Paris, France. 2015.

D12 Rally. Paris, France. 2015.

47

Effective Climate
Communication Tips
Based on:

Connecting on Climate: A Guide to Effective Climate Communication

Put
Yourself
in Your
Audience’s
Shoes
Channel the
Power of
Groups

Identify the values, identities, worldviews, and personal priorities of your audience

4 and craft communication strategies accordingly.

Think about whom your audience trusts and respects and whether these people

4 can serve as messengers.

Weave climate change into the activities of social groups and networks, such as

4 neighborhood associations, religious groups, clubs, or company divisions.

Provide existing group leaders with climate change communication and engage-

4 ment resources to activate the group’s entire membership.

Talk about the roles that individuals, governments (local, regional, and national),

4 businesses, and nonprofits can all play in addressing climate change.
Emphasize
Solutions
and
Benefits

4

Describe solutions that match the decision-making authority and capacity of the
audience and show people the role they can play as individuals (for example, talk
about local impacts and local solutions, not national policy and local impacts).

4

Highlight the personal and societal benefits that climate solutions will bring, such as
improving health, jump-starting new economic opportunities, catalyzing technological innovation, and strengthening communities.
Use messages that help people identify the locally relevant, personally experienced

Bring
Climate
Impacts
Close to
Home

4 consequences and impacts that climate change is already causing.
4

To avoid emotional numbing when communicating about the personally relevant
impacts of climate change, take care to also mention solutions and actions that
people can take and to focus on what impacts will occur, rather than on the exact
timeline of when they will occur.

4

Be aware of losses that may have come about as a result of recent climate impacts
and focus on preparedness for the next event, rather than on the timing of the
next event.
48

Connect
Climate to
Issues That
Matter
to Your
Audience
Use Images
and Stories to
Make Climate
Change Real

4

Choose content frames that connect to the audience’s concerns and worries. Content frames describe the “who,” “what,” “why,” and “how” of a climate
change narrative and can be useful in connecting climate change to issues
that matter to your audience. One common content frame is the public health
implications of climate change.

4

Choose structure frames that make the issue relevant and meaningful to the
audience. Structure frames emphasize “when,” “where,” and “how many” and
can shape how an audience relates to a message. Popular structure frames
include loss versus gain, present versus future, and local versus global.

4

Use images that depict people, groups, faces, or common household items.
They are more effective and more powerful than landscapes and nature
scenes.
Tell stories which can help make climate change more vivid and can help peo-

4 ple imagine the future and solutions to climate change.

Make audience members aware of the existence of confirmation bias and

4 encourage them to have an open mind, which can help them overcome it.
Make Climate
Science
Meaningful

Present the same piece of information in multiple formats to help people

4 understand unfamiliar numbers, metrics, and scales.
4

Acknowledge
Uncertainty,
But Show
What You
Know
Approach
Skepticism
Carefully

Pick just a few key facts about climate change to share with an audience and
put those facts into a context that audience members will understand, rather
than overwhelming them with too many facts.
Acknowledge the fact that there is uncertainty around elements of climate

4 science but emphasize that uncertainty doesn’t mean we shouldn’t act.

Use short, simple statements to highlight what is known with great certainty

4 about climate change—that it is happening and is caused by human activities.
Present climate-friendly behavior as the default choice. Encourage behaviors

4 that are beneficial for the individual and the environment.
4

Showcase positive actions that other people are taking to address climate
change, especially when these people constitute a majority in a certain area
or community.
Present climate-friendly behavior as the default choice which can encourage

4 behaviors that are beneficial for the individual and the environment.
Make
Behavior
Change Easy

4

Showcase positive actions that other people are taking to address climate
change, especially when these people constitute a majority in a certain area
or community.
Highlight climate-friendly social norms to help motivate people to undertake

4 their own climate-friendly behavior.
49

“Keep it positive.
Talk about
the difference
we can
COLLECTIVELY
make.”
Survey Participant

50

Straight of Georgia. Salish Sea, B.C., Canada. 2015.

Climate communication plays a pivotal role in
moving people to take action on climate change.
Because of the immediate need to address the
climate crisis, communication science has focused
on how to be more effective in moving people to
action. There are extensive communication resources
developed and shared online to provide tools for
communicators, community leaders, policy makers
that can also be accessed by everyone’s neighbors.
In-person communication continues to play a role
in shifting societal views and as soon as it becomes
the norm to take climate action, we will begin to
see a rapid shift in policy support for addressing the
climate crisis. Climate communication needs to be far
reaching into all aspects of society’s communication
channels, since the issue effects everyone
everywhere. A list of climate communication
resources can be found in Appendix C.

51

COP 21 Billboard. Paris, France. 2015.

People’s Climate March. Washington, D.C., U.S. 2017.

52

Climate
Activist
Survey
Global climate activists attended the COP 21 Summit
in Paris to demand that a historical global agreement
be reached. In anticipation of this, a climate activist
survey was administered to climate activists in Paris to
capture a snapshot of the climate justice movement.
Its purpose would be to inform others in the field what
is currently being done and what areas of activism
the survey participants felt would help the movement
grow. The survey results provide insights and
suggestions to move people to take climate action.

A climate activist survey design using the concepts Areas of Climate Actions

and Barriers to Climate Action measured the constructs in each concept as identified in the literature.
The codified constructs identified in the responses to the survey questions provide qualitative data, which
support the findings in the literature and provide additional climate actions, as well as barriers. Through
pattern matching identification, the results provide insights into the main themes of what climate activists are
doing now and what climate activists feel needs to be addressed and the actions they feel will make more of
a difference in building the movement.
53

Concepts
The first theoretical concept defining the scope of the survey is Areas of Climate Activism, which
is defined as categories of actions that have a positive impact to lowering carbon emissions or engaging people on addressing climate change. The second concept in this project research is Barriers to Climate Action. Barriers to Climate Action is defined as reasons or obstacles that hinder
people from changing their behavior from inaction to action on climate change.

54

Polar Pioneer Kayakivist Blockade.
Seattle, WA, U.S. 2015. Used with permission.

Constructs
The set of constructs or themes identified in the
literature that fit in the concept of Areas of Climate
Activism include:
climate communication
n climate policy
n public engagement
n education
n individual behaviors to lower carbon emissions
n

D12 Rally. Paris, France. 2015.

The constructs or themes identified in the concept
of Barriers to Climate Action as determined by
Semenza et al. include the following:
lack of knowledge
belief that action won’t make a difference
n not having enough time or money to act
n how others would view someone who took
action
n skepticism of climate change
n fatalism, meaning nothing will make a
difference1
n

Climate communication is defined as climate
education, two-way dialog, specific messaging and
framing to influence specific audiences.

n

Climate policy is defined as policy that influences
carbon reductions at the local, state or national level.
Public Engagement can be defined as public support for climate policy, collective action with supporting climate initiatives or involvement in community projects, campaigning, protests and movement
building.

Barriers to public engagement on climate change
can be defined as low public awareness, low awareness on climate change consensus, belief that climate change is a distant issue, and belief that it is
the responsibility of government or industry, not
the individual, according to Whitmarsh, O’Neill and
Lorenzoni.2

Individual behaviors to lower carbon emissions
can be defined as any behaviors or life-style choices
that reduce personal carbon footprints.

While the constructs for both the Areas of Climate Activism and Barriers to Climate Action were pre-defined
in the Climate Activist Survey, additional constructs or categories in the survey responses were recorded as
new categories as noted by ‘other’ category.
55

Survey Questions
Surveys are useful for human behavioral research because data is created through the perceptions of individuals in what moves people to action and what prevents them from taking action. A self-administered
survey produced data pertinent to the questions related to moving people to climate action. The following
questions are the measurements that provided open ended, qualitative responses or data sources from the
climate activists in Paris.
1.		What areas of the climate crisis are you
working on?

6. What do you think others need to do in
order to go from passive supporter to active
supporter?

2.		What drives or directs your passion towards
your efforts to solve the climate crisis?

7.		What strategies have you used that are
effective in promoting others to act?

3.		What made you into an activist?

8.		What are the challenges you face with this
crisis and what keeps you going when facing
these challenges?

4. In terms of threats of climate change, what are
the top three or four threats of climate change
that were the most powerful in motivating you
to become active?

9.		What do you think prevents people from
taking action on climate change?

5.		What actions do you take to help solve the
climate crisis?

10.		What do you think are the next steps in your
path of making even more of a difference?

Example:
Question 1.

What areas of the climate crisis are you working on?

Answer:

Primarily education and awareness through presentations, social media and demonstrations.
This response fits into several constructs or
themes as identified by the underlined statements in the response. Primarily education is
working on ‘climate communication’ or more
specifically, education. Social media is coded as
‘public engagement’ or more specifically, movement building. Demonstrations is coded as ‘public engagement’ or more specifically, protest.
Full survey available upon request

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.
56

Data Collection Methods
The targeted population sample of 327 climate
activists returned 61 completed surveys. The subject population was identified as climate activists
attending the Paris COP 21 Climate Summit. The
activists are from various parts of the world. The
surveys were administered via sending an email
to the participants after the Paris Climate Summit.
184 participant emails were collected in Paris at
the Climate Summit from three locations where
activists were congregating. 143 emails were collected from the Climate Reality COP 21 Attendee
List, adding up to a 327-person email list.

the 184 participants via email list on December 22,
2015, April 9, 2016 and June 28, 2016 and to the
list of 143 Climate Reality Leaders on January 3,
1016 only. The data collected in the form of written responses were collected online at qualtrics.
com providing qualitative responses that can be
added up based on the amount of times each
construct is chosen, and then compared to the
total for each construct for all of the respondents.
No previous surveys existed to gather the information necessary for this research, so the survey
is an original design. A research protocol regarding human subjects was submitted to the Human
Subjects Review Committee and the survey was
approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB).
The Survey constituted content analysis.

The survey instrument was designed in Qualtrics
as an on-line survey. The link to the Climate Activist Survey at qualtrics.com was sent via email to

57

Climate Action Zone. Paris, France. 2015.

Climate Action Zone. Paris, France. 2015.

58

Qualitative
Data Analysis

In order to analyze the data collected, the following
steps were followed: 1) The answers to each question were sorted into themes or categories that
matched the anticipated constructs from the literature. 2) Any new constructs were added as a theme
in the ‘other’ category, with more than one new or
‘other’ theme per question allowed. Respondents
may have more than one construct in each response
and all responses for all respondents were tabulated
in the corresponding theme or category.
The results from the survey were analyzed to help
identify what actions climate activists were engaged
in, what actions they felt needed to happen in the
future in order to increase climate activism and
which barriers they felt were preventing people from
taking climate action.

Survey Response and Analysis
The analysis provided on the following pages is
a standard objective review and evaluation of
the over 1000 total responses to the questions
asked in the climate activists survey. The survey
asked climate activists to share what led them
to become an activist, what they were working
on to address the climate crisis, what they felt
was necessary to grow the climate movement to
move people from passive supporter to active
supporter and other questions. The responses
were coded to identify themes in order to provide an understanding of the general areas that
global climate activists were influencing.

D12 Art Space. Paris, France. 2015.
59

“Fear does not motivate.
We need hope and optimism
that permeates. There is a
reason to act if the outcome
is positive. When we know
there are solutions, we can
move toward them.”

Survey Participant
60

Qualitative Data Response and Analysis
Female

57%

Out of 61 returned
surveys, 97% of the
respondents are from
developed countries
(See Figure 1) with
nearly half (48%) from
the U.S. and 36% from
12 different countries in
Europe. 57% identified
themselves as Female
and 43% Male. 21% of
the respondents get
paid for their activism
work, where as 62%
are not paid. 17%
of the respondents
sometimes get
a stipend or are
somewhat paid.
Figure 1

Male

43%

17%
sometimes get a stipend

21%
get paid for their

or are somewhat paid

Dominican Republic (2)

3%

activism work

Europe (22)

36%

Canada (4)

7%

US (29)

48%
61

62%
are not paid for their
activism work

Australia (4)

7%

“When someone simply
asks you to do something,
believing you have the
qualities it takes, that’s the
motivation. That’s when
I moved from ‘somewhat
involved’ to ‘actively
engaged and committed.’”

Survey Participant
62

1. What areas of the climate crisis are you working on?
this area. In terms of movement building the respondents work
on empowerment, climate justice, grassroots mobilization, divestment, building strong collaborative communities, partnering
with other organizations, and supporting indigenous people’s
rights. In terms of education, their responses included communicating the science and solutions, and raising public awareness
through education. The other themes were not as common and
fell between 15 and 23% of the respondents‘ work areas.

Response and analysis: The survey respondents work

in a variety of areas for addressing the climate crisis.
These areas are broken down into the following themes: ‘energy’, ‘policy’, ‘education’, ‘movement building’, ‘protest’, ‘earth
conservation’, ‘adaptation’ and ‘other.’ ‘Movement building’
was the most commonly reported area with 52% of the responses falling into this theme. The second largest theme
was ‘education’ with 39% of the respondents working in

23%
Energy

18%
Policy

39%

Education

52%

20%

Movement
Building

Protest

21%

15%

Earth
Adaptation
Conservation

18%
Other

2. What drives or directs your passion towards your efforts to
solve the climate crisis?
Some of the responses in the ‘something we must do theme’ are:
Response and analysis: The survey respondents’

passion is driven by several different themes identified as: ‘children’, ‘earth’, ‘something we must do’, ‘justice/inequality’, ‘emotion’, ‘facts/evidence’, ‘collective action’, and ‘other.’ Two emerging themes were identified. The most prominent theme was
‘earth’ expressed by 38% of the respondents, followed closely
by ‘something we must do’ expressed by 34% of the respondents. ‘Children’ ranked third by 23% of the respondents which
includes children, family and future generations. Generally,
the ‘earth’ theme encompasses responses such as love for the
planet, life on earth, commitment to nature, habitat protection,
and mass extinctions of other species.

23%

Children

38%
Earth

34%

Something
We Must Do

n

There’s no other important issue

n

We must change course

n

n

Solving the world’s greatest challenge

n

Deep commitment to make the world a better place

n

My ethics of justice for all of God’s creation

n

We need to act NOW

n

Sense of mission

n

20%

I have a strong sense of responsibility, accountability and moral
integrity that shapes my behaviors and actions.

I believe we in the U.S. have the responsibility to do something
about the problem we have had a large part in creating

13%

Justice/
Inequality

Emotion

63

5%

Facts/
Evidence

15%

Collective
Action

8%

Other

Global Climate March. Vancouver, B.C., Canada. 2015.

3. What made you into an activist?
Some of the ‘commitment/responsibility’ answers are:

Response and analysis: There were two dominant

themes that emerged. Over half of the respondents’ answers
fell equally into two themes ‘gaining of knowledge’ and ‘commitment/responsibility’, with 26% responding to each theme.
The other themes identified were ‘upbringing’, ‘putting skills or
passion to work’, ‘earth impacts/changes’, and ‘other.’ ‘Gaining knowledge’ was characterized by either watching a film,
attending a course, reading a book or just general acquiring of
knowledge.

26%

Gaining of
Knowledge

16%

Upbringing

16%

n

Compelling instinct to help

n

Commitment to cause

n

A sense of responsibility for the climate crisis

n

I just saw something wasn’t right and felt compelled

n

I believe we have a responsibility to make a difference

n

Longstanding (lifelong) commitment to benefit life on earth

n

A sense of obligation to other people

26%

Skills/
Passion

Commitment/
Responsibility
64

11%

Earth Impacts/
Changes

21%

Facts/
Evidence

4. In terms of threats of climate change, what are the top three or
four threats of climate change that were the most powerful in
motivating you to become active?
refugees, war, competition of resources, and intergenerational
abuse. 39% of the respondents cited ‘conflict’. The third emerging theme was ‘nature’ which was recorded in a variety of ways
such as the threats on nature and the natural world, change in
habitat, loss of species, forest devastation, and loss of biodiversity. This theme was recorded by 30% of the respondents.

Response and analysis: The most dominant theme

was ‘climate impacts’ with 62% of the respondents citing
impacts such as drought, fires, floods, ocean acidification and
sea level rise. Sea level rise was the most recorded climate
impact response (28%) followed by drought (16%). The second most dominant theme centered around ‘conflict’. The
responses ranged from threat to food security, poverty, climate

General Responses

62%

Climate
Impacts

21%

Extreme
Weather
Events

8%

Pollution

8%

30%

11%

15%

GHG
Emissions

Nature

39%
Conflict

15%
Justice

30%

Climate Impacts

16%

Drought

28%

Sea Level
Rise

Ocean
Acidification

Water

65

8%
Fires

30%

Other
Impacts

Other

5. What actions do you take to help solve the climate crisis?
Response and analysis: The responses were record-

ed under the following six themes: ‘lowering CO2 emissions’,
‘influence politicians’, ‘education’, ‘movement building’, ‘protest’,
‘writing’ and ‘other’. Two dominant themes emerged with
‘movement building’ the most prominent with 64% of the
respondents answers expressed in this theme. Some of the
responses recorded were:
n

Mentoring emerging youth leaders

n

Getting people in touch with others

n

39%

33%

Influence
Politicians

62%

Education

Sign petitions

n

Working with other activists

n

Networking in the environmental movement

n

Promote on social media

n

Working with Indigenous communities

n

Helping other initiatives

The other dominant theme was ‘education’ with 62% of the
respondents taking action through raising awareness and educating about climate change in various ways.

I encourage others to keep talking about this issue with their
peers

Lowering
Carbon
Emissions

n

64%

Movement
Building

66

33%
Protest

10%

Writing

11%
Other

Sacred Stone Camp Entrance.
Cannon Ball, ND, U.S. 2016. Used with permission.

14. What do you think others need to do in order to go from a passive supporter to an active supporter?
The ‘educate’ theme was second with 30% of the respondents’
answers falling into this theme. The theme ‘see results/success’ followed closely with 28% of the respondents’ answers
falling into this theme with responses such as:

Response and analysis: The responses to this

question were broken down into the following themes: ‘talk to
others’, ‘make it personal/responsibility’, ‘take actions’, ‘see results/success’, ‘educate’, ‘government intervention’, ‘join others’,
and ‘other’. There were three dominant themes identified from
the responses. ‘Make it personal/responsibility’ was the most
dominant with 31% of the respondents’ answers in this theme.
These answers included:
n

See it as a moral issue

n

Make it personal

n

Realize their responsibility as a consumer

n

Build tiny successes

n

Visually see the effects

n

They need to witness it

n

n

Understanding of the personal stakes, a personalized and
urgent call to action

n

Links to their own lives and well being

n

Be personally impacted

n

n

n

n

Sell the benefits as opposed to hitting people with the problems all the time
See how the work they do can connect to the broader movement
To see that some of the steps they can take are quite simple
and empowering
There’s a reason to act if the outcome will be positive

People need to know that what they do on a personal level is
worthwhile

7%

Talk to
Others

31%

21%

Make it Personal/
Take
Responsibility
Actions

28%

30%

See Results/
Success

Educate

7%

Government
Intervention

11%
Join
Others

20%
Other

15. What strategies have you used that are effective in promoting
others to act?
Response and analysis: The most dominant theme

theme was ‘conversation’ which included responses related to
listening and two-way dialog. Other themes included ‘lead by
example,’ ‘moral activism’ and ‘social media.’

centered around ‘education’ through various means including:
public presentations, sharing information, TV shows, university lectures, trainings, workshops, etc. The next dominant

13%

Social Media

20%

Lead by Example

41%

33%

Education

Conversation
67

13%

Moral Activism

25%
Other

“What keeps
me going is
the sense that it is
my moral obligation
to keep trying.”

Survey Participant
68

16. What are the challenges you face with this crisis and what keeps
you going when facing these challenges?
question, not everyone gave a response as to what keeps them
going. There were 2 general themes to this part of the question which were ‘community, collaboration and support’ and
‘must do something’. Twice as many chose the ‘community,
collaboration and support’ (42.6%) over ‘must do something’
(21.3%).

Response and analysis: The most dominant theme

centered around ‘apathy’ expressed in a variety of ways, such
as indifference, lack of interest, complacency, and hopelessness. 33% of the respondents responded in this theme. The
next dominant theme was ‘power/greed’ with 23% of the
responses falling into this theme. As for the second part of the

15%

Not Doing
Enough

7%
Burn
Out

33%

23%

Apathy

Power/
Greed

11%

Finances

11%

Denial/
Skepticism

21%
Other

17. What do you think prevents people from taking action on climate change?
‘ignorance’, ‘comfort/fear of change’, and ‘other.’ The two
dominant themes identified were ‘helpless/hopeless/despair’
written by 31% of the respondents and ‘lack of knowledge’ by
28% of the respondents.

Response and analysis: There were many different

responses as to what prevents people from taking action. The
main themes identified were: ‘confusion/propaganda’, ‘low
priority/no time’, ‘overwhelming/too big of problem’, ‘helpless/
hopeless/despair’, ‘lack of knowledge’, ‘scary/fear’, ‘apathy’,

11%

Confusion/
Propaganda

15%

Scary/Fear

18%

18%

Low Priority/ Overwhelming/
No Time
Too Big of
Problem

10%
Apathy

7%

Ignorance

69

31%

28%

Helpless/
Hopeless/
Despair

Lack of
Knowledge

8%

25%

Comfort/
Fear of Change

Other

18. What do you think are the next steps in your path of making
even more of a difference?
Response and analysis: The responses fell into seven

n

different themes which are: ‘lower personal carbon footprint’,
‘policy’, ‘education’, ‘movement building’, ‘self care’, ‘job’ and
‘other.’ ‘Movement building’ was the dominant theme with
56% of the respondents’ answers reflected in this theme.
Some of the responses included:
n
n

n

n
n

Work in engaging the Latino community to act on climate
Which target group, which level of information background do
I have to increase
What I can do in my nearer surroundings to do bottom up
change

8%

Lower
Carbon
Footprint

16%
Policy

21%

Education

Meeting with other activists to brainstorm more ideas on actions we can take
Connect this movement with other movements
Building a team of people to work on researching existing
‘frontline’ efforts and influencing wider adoption of a strategic
solidarity plan for the movement

n

Nationalize climate mobilization coalition effort

n

To reach those not in the choir

n

More on social media

n

Working with other supporters throughout the country and
internationally

56%

More
Activism/
Movement
Building

10%
Self
Care

8%
Job

18%
Other

Familias Unidas March for Farmworker Justice. Mount Vernon, WA, U.S. 2016.
70

Limitations
Potential limitations include the population bias
of the climate activists in Paris. These activists
had the means to travel, and some may have
been there for work and not as volunteers. While
they are all exemplary activists, the data is biased
towards those currently active only. However,
this may provide a more focused sample group.
Because the questions provided qualitative data,
the questions could be interpreted differently
because the survey sample was from people in
various countries. The data could be impacted
by cultural and language differences. This is addressed by acknowledging that there are differ-

ences in actions for each country by offering an
‘other ’ category so the data could be inclusive. In
addition, there are time, location and recruitment
biases. The time spent with activists was at different times of day, and varied based on availability.
A specific time was not chosen and therefore, not
consistent. However, opportunities to connect
with activists at various locations where activists
were congregating seemed to be a more flexible
approach. While the locations were biased, there
were no demographics targeted as the people
chosen were those that were in the area at the
time set aside to connect and collect emails.

‘100% Renewable Eiffel Tower Peace Symbol’ - Human Aerial Art. Paris, France. 2015. Used with permission.

The survey responses provide a glimpse into what activists are currently doing to help build the climate
justice movement as well as areas they plan to work on in the future. This gives us a sense of where
activists feel energy or direction needs to be applied moving forward. Learning what moved them to
become active supporters helps provide organizers and climate communicators ideas on what climate
impacts can move others. By including messages with those threats emphasized can possibly move more
people to become active.
71

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.

72

Climate Justice
Movement
Building
The origin of the climate justice movement is
difficult to pinpoint since it has evolved out of the
environmental and global justice movements and
incorporates efforts from global governments, NGOs,
and grassroots organizations. This manual includes
a brief introduction to the origins of global climate
action and the climate justice movement that has
emerged. This movement has helped to shape the
climate justice discourse on a global scale. A Climate
Justice Movement Building timeline highlighting
moments in the movement and the international
organizations working on building the climate justice
movement can be found at the end of this section.

73

Global
Climate Action
Origins

Highlighting key historical
moments that address climate
change and building the
climate movement can help us
understand the magnitude, pace,
and impact of addressing the
climate crisis. Climate change
was first acknowledged at the
global level when the World
Meteorological Organization
and United Nations Environment
Programme established the
International Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) in 1988 to create
scientific reports on climate change
to inform international policy
decisions.1 That same year, NASA
scientist James Hansen testified to
the United States Congress that
human-caused climate change
was occurring.2 The first widely
read book on climate change,
The End of Nature, was written by
Bill McKibben in 1989. This book
helped bring climate change into
the minds of the general pubic
and educate them on the severity
of the issue. It was no longer just
a topic for scientists to study and
know.

Official Poster for People’s Climate March. 2014. Used with permission.
74

In 1992, the United Nations (UN)
held the Earth Summit in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, where they formed
the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) to meet annually at the
Conference of the Parties (COP)
and address climate change in
hopes for collective action.3 Their
first meeting took place in Berlin,
Germany in 1995. It wasn’t until
1997 that an agreement to act on
climate change was created with
the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol,
the world’s first greenhouse gas
reductions treaty, which went into
effect in 2007.4

Global Justice Movement
to Climate Justice Movement
Prior to the Kyoto Protocol, the World Trade
Organization (WTO), an intergovernmental
organization was formed in 1995 to regulate
international trade. According to Frankel, the Kyoto
Protocol and WTO had competing interests, in
relation to carbon emission reduction and subsidies
for fossil fuels.5 Grassroots organizations also began
mobilizing and participating in direct actions against
globalization with anti-capitalism sentiments. An
example is the WTO protests in Seattle at the
end of 1999 in which hundreds of organizations
from all over the world
participated.6

hundreds of direct actions were taken throughout
Europe.11
The concept of climate justice first appeared in a
1999 CorpWatch report titled Greenhouse Gangsters
vs. Climate Justice.12 According to CorpWatch.org,
this report “successfully redefined climate change
as an environmental justice and human rights issue,
and helped mobilize communities already adversely
impacted by the fossil fuel industry.”13 “Climate
Justice integrally links human rights and ecological
sustainability, recognizing
that the communities
fighting to live free of the
environmental and social
problems created by big
oil are also on the front
lines in the battle against
climate change.”14

According to Russell, the
global justice movement
grew out of the WTO
protests and the climate
movement in Europe
rose out of the anticapitalist mobilizations
in 2005 against the
G8 (8 most powerful
countries in the world).7
Furthermore, transnational
non-governmental
organizations protested
globalization in relation
to its impacts on the
environment and
human and labor
rights.8 Environmental
organizations such as
Friends of the Earth
and Greenpeace took
on global challenges
connecting issues like poverty and the environment.9
“In the summer of 2003, Friends of the Earth
adopted a five-year action plan whose strategic
aims are to integrate well-established work on
sustainability and biodiversity with a concern for
environmental justice at home and abroad.”10 In
addition, the Camp for Climate Action held trainings
for direct climate action between 2005-2010, when

Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs)
have been working on
climate change since 1989,
when the Climate Action
Network International
(CAN) was formed,
with over 1,100 NGOs
from over 120 countries
represented today.15
In 1990, the Indigenous
Environmental Network
was formed to help U.S.
Indigenous communities
address economic and
environmental justice issues.16 Three years later,
La Via Campesina, an international peasant’s
movement began to fight the globalization of
agriculture. Today, they represent over 2 million
farmers in around 165 organizations in over 70
countries and today they collaborate on climate
justice issues through the lens of food sovereignty
and food and farmworker justice.17
75

Even though climate justice was introduced into
the global justice movement in 1999, it wasn’t
popularized until 2007, with the formation of Climate
Justice Now (CJN) which adopted the name Climate
Justice Action (CJA) when mobilizing for the 2009
COP 15 summit in Copenhagen.18 At the COP 15
summit, climate justice was formulated with central
messaging of ‘system change, not climate change’
Change and the Rights of Mother Earth (CMPCC),
with the purpose of challenging the capital based
in April 2010, to forge a path forward that was
solution of carbon trading.19
different from the UNFCCC process.22 The outcome
of this conference was the formation of the “People’s
The COP 15 summit was met with civil society
Agreement”, an 11-page document, incorporating
demanding that climate justice be addressed
the causes of climate change and the need to
and not just carbon emissions. The COP Summit
recognize the rights of Mother Earth.23 This vision
failed because civil society’s message of systemic
also included the call to create a Tribunal of Climate
change “fell short of constructing a different
and Environmental Justice and development of a
way of understanding the problem of climate
global democracy to make decisions on this issue
change.”20 And the response of this failure was two
that affect the planet and humanity.24
fold. Because of the ineffectiveness of grassroots
organizations to demand changes through their
The origins of the climate justice movement is
global reform agenda at COP 15, this led to the rise
difficult to trace, according to Building Bridges
of climate justice resistance movements because of
21
Collective. “The term was popularised by the
the “utterly unsustainable accumulation of capital.”
formation of the ‘Climate Justice Now!’ network in
Bali during the COP 13 negotiations in 2007. In the
In addition, the second significant response of this
build up to the COP 15 in Copenhagen the term
failure came from Bolivia’s president, Evo Morales,
who held the World People’s Conference on Climate became a mobilizing platform across Europe as the

Climate Justice
Movement
Development

76

COP 15 Protest.
Copenhagen, Denmark. 2009. Used with permission.

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

‘Climate Justice Action’ (CJA) network opposed the
COP as an unjust set of negotiations interested in
expanding capitalism, similar to Russell, rather than
in addressing the global climate crises.”25

Meanwhile, members from CJA met in Amsterdam in
February, 2010, after the COP 15 summit, to discuss
what could constitute a “movement for climate
justice.”27 In their discussion paper titled What Does
Climate Justice Mean in Europe:

In summary from the Bolivia summit, Bridge Builders
Collective share:

“Climate justice means recognising that
the capitalist growth paradigm, which
leads to over extraction, overproduction
and overconsumption stands in deep
contrast to the biophysical limits of
the planet and the struggle for social
justice... Fundamentally, we believe
that we cannot prevent further global
warming without addressing the way
our societies are organised – the fight
for climate justice and the fight for
social justice are one and the
same.”28

“Maybe the only real justice is what
can be gained by the exercise of
collective action, against the threats
that capitalism and climate change
pose to all of our lives, and for the
creation of other forms of life outside
of capitalism. In this vein, instead of
worrying about conflicting definitions,
maybe we should listen to the advice
that Leonardo Cerdo gave us; ‘It doesn’t
matter what we call it; what matters is
how we take action.’”26
77

In 2008, the international organization
350.org officially launched and, in 2009,
organized the first day of international
climate action on October 24th with over
5,200 events in 181 countries.29 In 2010,
they organized a “Global Work Party”
day with approximately 7,000 work
parties around the world, displaying
local solutions emphasizing alternatives
to using fossil fuels.30 350.org took a turn
toward direct action in 2011, when over
1,250 people were arrested outside the
White House in protest of the proposed
Keystone XL Pipeline.31 This prompted
a national awareness of the issue which
propelled a 4-year nationwide campaign
to successfully halt the construction
of the pipeline.32 In 2012, 350.org
launched a divestment campaign
calling for institutions such as university
campuses, cities, and faith groups to
divest from fossil fuels, thus stripping
the social license of these companies to
cause further damage.33 Currently, 731
institutions have committed to divest
$5.45 trillion and 58,000+ individuals
have committed to divest about $5.2
billion, according to the report on
gofossilfree.org.34

All photos: People’s Climate March. Washington, D.C., U.S. 2017.
78

Continuing to build the movement, 350.
org and other international grassroots
organizations have been mobilizing and
building networks working on social,
racial, economic and environmental
justice issues. This effort was
demonstrated with the coming together
of the People’s Climate March on
September 21, 2014 in New York City, the
largest global climate march in history.35
The march brought together various
groups across the movement including
labor, indigenous and other marginalized
communities, yet the march wasn’t able
to carry out a unified political voice.36
However, there were significant gains in
building the climate justice movement
and everyone was collectively under
a “big tent.”37 “What the march did,
better than any other event in history,
was demonstrate the unity of activists
demanding genuine emissions cuts

Shoes placed in Place
de la République in lieu
of global climate march
in Paris, 29 November,
2015, cancelled due to
terrorist attacks two
weeks earlier.

Global Climate March. Paris, France. 2015. Used with permission.

and government funding of an alternative way of
arranging society.”38 The “Flood Wall Street” event
the day after the march turned out 3,000 protesters
participating in direct action with a message, “that
only with a transition beyond Wall Street’s stock
exchange capitalism can we have a living future.”39

charting the success to a trillion trees. On May 22,
2017 the counter read 14,209,083,086 trees planted
and 55,000 children between 9-12 are trained Climate
Ambassadors.41
Burkett analyzes what the climate movement can
learn from previous social movements.42 For example,
the global community protested against Shell Oil
in 2015, demanding that Shell not drill in the Arctic.
The term ‘kayaktivist’ was born in Seattle out of
these efforts with a growing trend of nonviolent
direct action (NVDA).43 This increase in direct action
can have a positive effect on agenda setting for
policy, according to Burkett.44 She shares, “empirical
evidence reveals that protest ‘positively and
significantly’ influences political attention.”45

According to Roser and Seidel, “With its impressive
worldwide activist network, well-coordinated global
actions, and its increasing involvement in determined
direct action against climate-destructive policies
and new energy megaprojects, 350.org has raised
the bar for climate activism in the U.S. and served
as a central catalytic force in the global climate
movement.”40
In recent years, the youth are also taking a more
participatory approach into their own hands and
planting trees. A young boy named Felix Finkbeiner
started an organization called Plant-for-the-Planet in
2007 at the age of 9, where children can be trained
to be climate justice ambassadors to stand up for
climate justice and help fight the climate crisis by
planting trees. Plant-for-the-Planet has a counter
on their website of all the trees recently planted,

The end of 2015 brought us a keystone moment
in the climate justice movement with the Paris
Agreement at the COP 21 Summit. For the first time,
195 countries agreed to act on climate which created
the platform for civil society to force governments to
take stronger action. Over 600,000 people marched
in 175 countries the day before the summit to send
a message to global leaders to act on climate.46
79

“Genuine solutions to the climate crisis cannot
emerge from climate negotiations, whether on a
domestic or an international level, unless significant
pressure—pressure that is greater than that of
powerful corporate interests—is brought to bear by
a globally linked, locally grounded group of social
movements mobilizing around the theme of climate
justice.”47

known when Amy Goodman with Democracy Now
visited during Labor Day weekend, and caught on
video guard dogs attacking the indigenous water
protectors. In a live interview at the Chandler Center
for the Arts in January, 2017, Amy Goodman shares,
“all the international media was now covering
this, and covering the issue and that is what is key.
Because when you shine a spotlight, and you show
the blood glistening in the mouths of the dogs,
Native American blood, it cannot be counter denied,
it cannot be called false news. The images are there
and we must demand that the media cover these
mass movements that are historical and how essential
it is, especially now”50 The NoDAPL campaign showed
“notably deep diversity” in its protests, and there
are now “pockets of organization that work at the
intersection of race, poverty, and climate change.”51
Priest confirms, “If there is no media coverage of
an issue that most do not directly confront in other
ways, attention recedes as though the issue hardly
exists – or at least is unimportant. If there is coverage,
regardless of the tone or other content details,

The movement increased its civil disobedience in
the spring of 2016 with collaborative global efforts
to show a growing global resistance and to send a
global message that we must break free from fossil
fuels and move towards a just transition to a clean
energy future. On six continents, thousands risked
arrest during Break Free direct actions, from May
3-15, 2016.48 2016 also brought us the resistance
effort to stop the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL)
at Standing Rock, North Dakota in the U.S., which
showed great diversity in support of this effort.49
The No DAPL campaign became internationally

COP 21 Sarayacu Canoe Water Blessing with Amy Goodman. Paris, France. 2015.
80

People’s Climate March. Washington, D.C., U.S. 2017.

people tend to think the issue is more important – it
rises on their personal agenda.”52

position on climate change and move us toward a
clean energy future.58

Furthermore, Burkett concludes that “the
environmental mainstream still struggles to
effectively build alliances and the climate grassroots
is still in the process of building bridges and
establishing an identity.”53 She also suggests that
alliances in the climate movement be “diverse and
cohesive.”54 She argues that, “while the combination
of institutional influence activity and protest allows
a movement to simultaneously persuade, disrupt
and bargain, the lack of cohesive vision can be
fatal.”55 When black ghettos began to dissent and
organize against poverty, the civil rights movement
splintered in so many directions, the movement lost
its cohesive vision.56

Bringing in the values through organized religion
is a powerful force that continues to develop in the
climate movement. The Pope’s Encyclical, Laudato Si’
released in 2015, focused on caring for our common
home and was the first time there was a call from
any religion to discuss the moral implications to act
on climate change.59 Burkett concludes that for the
climate justice movement to be successful, it must
have the following ingredients of other successful
movements: “clarity of purpose, shared values forged
by proponents, effective planning, and connection
to the mainstream.”60
The systems in place create a framework and
rules for societies to function and it is within these
systems that limit possibilities, according to Russell.61
Frameworks for governance as in capitalism,
constitutional government, laws regarding property
or inheritance, military and police create constraints
on possibilities.62 Russell suggests that we consider
collectivizing the processes of how we live our lives
in common and the recognition of our political
capital for change and consider how society faces
multiple crises at the same time so that we can
mobilize together to tackle the crises together.63

Also, building coalitions is key to “avoid the
misperception that societies can segregate the
environment literally or figuratively, from our lives,
our futures and our individual dignity” in addition
to “placing a human face on climate change.”57 The
public shared their alliances and intersectionality in
the People’s Climate March in Washington, D.C. and
cities across country and globally to send a message
to President Trump on his 100th day in office that
we resist, we build, we rise if he doesn’t reverse his
81

Climate Justice
Movement Building
Today and Beyond

push for climate justice at the UN level, but more
importantly climate justice continues to show up in
the messaging of local campaigns.65 Furthermore,
with the increase of climate related disasters, this
provides visible evidence for the need for change
along with the immediacy to address the social justice
aspects of the climate crisis.66 According to Tokar, “the
climate’s best hope lies in the combination of raising
climate militancy in the North and the increasing
international visibility of struggles in the South.”67

In terms of building the climate justice movement,
bringing what is just, meaning morally right and fair,
into the conversation alongside climate education
can help move people to action. People can be
empowered to act when they understand that
climate change impacts those suffering the most are
the least responsible for causing the harm in the first
place. Moore and Russell discuss how messaging
involves strategy, which raises the question by Paulo
Friere, “What can we do today, so that tomorrow we
can do what we are unable to do today?”64

The results from the Climate Activist Survey show that
many activists spend time on educating people on
climate change. In 2006, the Academy award winning
documentary, An Inconvenient Truth, helped catapult
the public’s awareness of the impacts and severity
of climate change. Shortly after the film release, U.S.
Vice President Al Gore began a training program
for others to give the climate change presentation
featured in the film. As of May, 2017, over 11,000
people have been trained by Al Gore to not only give
the presentation for educational purposes but to also
join the climate justice movement and perform Acts
of Leadership.68 According to Stoss, there has been
a surge of climate justice research in the past several
years, from 20 articles cited a year in 2010 to over
80 articles cited a year in 2016 (See figure 2) in the
Web of ScienceTM database.69 Researchers are keen to
help solve the climate crisis through deepening our
understanding of what it will take to move people to
take action on climate change.

How do we grow the movement globally to help
solve the climate crisis? In order to transition away
from a fossil fuel driven economy to a clean energy
economy, laws and policies for communities, regions,
states, and nations can be implemented to help
39%
lower carbon emissions.
Therefore, it is essential to
Lowering
get people behind initiatives
or plans for transition
Carbon
Emissions
even if they are costlier
in the short term. The Paris
Agreement shows unilateral global support for
action, therefore, it gives societies across the globe
the backbone to know that government should be
acting. According to Tokar, groups will continue to

Number of Citations Retrieved

Figure 2

100

Growth of “Climate Justice Literature”
2000-2016, Web of Science™

80
60
40
20
0
2005

2010
Year
82

2015

The use of climate justice language has been found
to be motivating in civil campaigns where civil
society pressures governments to act on political
issues.70 People might then start to change their
own behaviors about consumption and better yet,
demand that their government make policies that
can help lower carbon emissions by asking them
to stop big projects such as Keystone XL and the
Dakota Access Pipeline. The Dakota Access Pipeline
fight is bringing to light a suggestion from Kaswan,
which having marginalized voices at the table for
policy making helps with transparency, and there
should be no more privileges for the privileged.71

aspect of strategic capacity.”74
The climate justice movement must be more
proactive, creative, and solution oriented in regards
to resistance strategies suggests Vinthagen,
not about technical solutions, but rather about
changing our economy as it relates to questioning
power and resistance.75 A mass global climate
justice movement is the only force that is strong
enough to change our capitalist system.76
Vinthagen concludes that, “we only have some
years to make drastic changes and the politicians
have failed for too long.”77 He also suggests that a
mass mobilization needs to have a well founded
strategy that writers and researchers propose,
including social scientists.78

Diversity in the movement is its greatest strength.
Yet, because of the global nature of the the climate
crisis, there is a “greater need for coordination,
determination and commonality of vision.”72 Tokar
concludes that the “movement’s best hope lies in
the combination of rising climate militancy in the
North and the increasing international visibility of
struggles in the South.”73 Priest concludes, “having
members with diverse perspectives is an important

Fortunately, marches continue to increase in
numbers and the People’s Climate March on April
29, 2017 in Washington, D.C. was one of the largest
climate marches in history with over 370 sister
marches around the world with more than 300,000
marching for climate, jobs and justice.79

83

People’s Climate March. New York City, NY, U.S. 2014.

Climate justice frameworks can help change the
minds of the public as well. When using climate
justice as a lens for looking at the problem of climate
change, we see this moral argument for change
in various ways. The divestment movement “had
the effect of stigmatizing fossil fuels.”80 When moral
factors are considered, the public mind is shifted.
Justice depends on people coming together in
collective action even if their values, world views
and circumstances are different.81 How people work
together socially to answer deep questions is what
matters.82 The power ultimately lies in the voters.
“Democracy can process only the political will that
voters feed into the political process in the first place;
even the best procedure cannot conjure a just output
out of an unjust input. Therefore, the responsibility
for just outcomes can be delegated only to a limited
extent to those who design political procedures.”83

systems of governance and citizens rising up to
demand bolder action from their governments
as an essential part of the solution, according to
Tokar.84 Many of the global organizations fighting
for climate justice are addressing the problems of
injustice through the current systems in regards
to social, racial, economic and environmental
problems. Transformational moments have taught
us that “when major shifts in the economic balance
of power take place, they are invariably the result
of extraordinary levels of social mobilization.”85 Klein
contends that the change will come in “spasms of
rapid-fire lawmaking, with one breakthrough after
another.”86 Klein also reinforces the need for diverse
convergences and aiming to not just change laws
but to change patterns of thought around justice,
for example, not passing a minimal carbon tax
but rather passing a minimum wage increase.87
According to Bond, there isn’t much time to plot a
course of action, we only have a little time for mass
mobilization demanding climate justice.88

What is possible for building the climate justice
movement needs to not be constrained by the

84

People’s Climate March. Washington, D.C., U.S. 2017.

All Photos: People’s Climate March. Washington, D.C., U.S. 2017.

85

Climate Justice Movement Building

Timeline

2012
2010

2008

1999

“Climate Justice”
term used for first
time in the
movement

1989

“End of Nature”
First book on
climate change by
Bill McKibben

1997

Kyoto Protocol
International treaty
to curb greenhouse
gas emissions

1980s 1990s
1989

Climate Action
Network
International
Over 1100
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs) in more
than 120 countries

1990

Indigenous
Environmental
Network
Addresses
environmental
and economic
justice issues

Nature gets rights
Equador is first
country to include
rights of nature
chapter in
constitution

2007

Climate Justice
Now!
At COP 13 in Bali,
Indonesia grassroots
networks
collaborated to form
this coalition which
evolved into Climate
Justice Action for
COP15

2006

“An Inconvenient
Truth”
Award-winning
documentary by
Vice President Al Gore

The World People's
Conference on
Climate Change
and the Rights of
Mother Earth
Creates Universal
Declaration of Rights
of Mother Earth

2009

Rio +20 People’s
Summit
Declaration
Social and
environmental
justice defense of
the commons

2012

Do The Math Tour
Launch of 350.org
divestment
campaign

350.org
International Day
of Climate Action
Over 5,000 actions
= largest protest

2009

COP15 Summit
Copenhagen
People’s Assembly
and Reclaim Power
March leading to
250+ arrests

2011

No Keystone XL
Pipeline fight
begins
Over 1,250 arrests at
the White House

2000s

1993

La Via Campesina
164 local and
national
organizations
in 73 countries
representing about
200 million farmers

2005

Grassroots Global
Justice Alliance
Raising voices for
communities of
color and working
class, linking social
justice movements
globally

2006

The Climate
Reality Project
Climate education
and advocacy

2015
2014
2013

Forward On
Climate March
50,000+ march in
Washington, D.C.

People’s Climate
March
400,000+ march in
New York City

International
Treaty to Protect
the Sacred
Demands the
United States and
Canada recognize
the rights found in
the United Nations
Declaration of the
Rights of
Indigenous People

Break Free 2016
Largest global
disobedience
actions against fossil
fuel infrastructure

2017

People’s Climate
March
Washington, D.C.
and global solidarity
marches

2015

2014
2013

COP21 Summit, Paris
195 countries agree to
contribute to lowering
global climate emissions
to remain below 1.5 °C

2016

Flood Wall Street
Thousands
demonstrate before
United Nations
Climate Summit with
message: Stop
Capitalism, End The
Climate Crisis

Leap Manifesto
Call for Canada on caring for
the Earth and one another

2015

Shell NO!
Term kayaktivist is born out
of stopping Shell Oil from
drilling in the Arctic

2016

2017

2013

2015

Standing Rock
Movement by
Indigenous water
protectors fighting
Dakota Access
Pipeline;
Sept. 4, 2016:
Democracy NOW
coverage of dog
attacks sparks
international
support

Keystone XL
Battle Returns
Trump
administration
grants approval
for Keystone XL
Pipeline

2015

No Keystone XL
Pipeline victory
President Obama
cancelled project

2008
2008

350.org
Climate-focused
campaigns, projects and
actions in 188 countries

Pan African
Climate Justice
Alliance
Coalition of Civil
Society
Organizations

2010s
2010

Climate Justice Alliance
Supports local communities
advancing a just transition;
Our Power Campaign

2008
2007

Plant-for-the-Planet
global movement to fight the
climate crisis planting trees

Climate Justice
Action
European
campaigns for
climate justice

2010

Global Alliance for the
Rights of Nature

System Change
Not Climate
Change
An ecosocialist
coalition

Global Campaign
to Demand
Climate Justice
Supports local
communities
advancing a just
transition,
including Our
Power Campaign

The greater the
difficulty in our
path, the greater
the opportunity
for our growth
and ultimate
victory; we can
always become
more than we
have ever been.
—Phil Lane, Jr.1
Totem Pole Journey Blessing Ceremony with Phil Lane, Jr.
Seattle, WA, U.S. 2016. Used with permission.

88

Totem Pole Journey Smudging Ceremony.
Seattle, WA, U.S. 2016. Used with permission.

Conclusion

communication are more effective in generating active support for climate action helps organizers with
their messaging for public engagement in order to
increase collective action while movement building.
Continued research is needed to better understand
how to counter-act the media pressure from the fossil fuel industry that continues to manufacture doubt
and influence policy makers and the general public,
in order to move people towards public insistence.
In the U.S., it is evident that under the current administration, climate policies must be instigated and
supported at the local and state levels.

Break Free 2016 March. Anacortes, WA, U.S. 2016.

Climate change is a global issue, affecting every
corner of the globe in varying degrees of severity.
Patterns of inequity have emerged in terms of which
countries produce greater greenhouse gas emissions and which countries face the impacts. This
inequity requires the global community to address
the compounding forms of injustice in the realm of
looking at social, economical, racial and environmental justice concerns. Furthermore, the scientific
consensus requires urgent action to lower carbon
emissions. In order to bring about the swift change
to lower carbon emissions, public insistence can play
a role in moving governments to act.

While this problem is global in scale, action at the
local level through climate communication and
increasing public engagement is essential, everywhere. Addressing climate justice also means taking
a look at the current system and considering system
change to capitalism. One could argue that climate
change can be solved by capitalism alone, but it
can also be argued that the capitalistic model does
not take into account the societal inequities involving racial, social and environmental concerns. The
business sector also plays a critical role in advancing
technologies and implementing solutions; and civil
society, too, can support sustainable business solutions through their purchasing power. Civil society
can also make shareholder choices and divest from
companies whose business models put profits before
principles and invest in companies and organizations promoting solutions toward a just transition to
a clean energy future. In terms of what governments
can do, there is not much time to plot one global
course of action, only little time for mass mobilization demanding climate justice in order to force
governments to swifter action.

People must also alter their actions to lower their
own carbon emissions, especially in developed
countries, however, we need more than personal actions to bring about the scale of carbon reductions
necessary. Moving people to act on climate has
many challenges, yet through collective action and
building active support, pressure can force governments to act as we have witnessed through previous
social movements. Successful social movements provide strategies and insights for building the climate
justice movement. Furthermore, extensive research
has examined the communication efforts of climate
education and people’s perceptions to climate
change. Understanding what aspects of climate
89

90

Appendicies
Appendix A
Climate Justice Frameworks

Bali Principles of Climate Justice
1. Affirming the sacredness of Mother Earth, ecological unity
and the interdependence of all species, Climate Justice
insists that communities have the right to be free from
climate change, its related impacts and other forms of
ecological destruction.

9. Affirming the principle of Ecological debt, Climate
Justice protects the rights of victims of climate change
and associated injustices to receive full compensation,
restoration, and reparation for loss of land, livelihood and
other damages.

2. Climate Justice affirms the need to reduce with an aim
to eliminate the production of greenhouse gases and
associated local pollutants.

10. Climate Justice calls for a moratorium on all new fossil
fuel exploration and exploitation; a moratorium on the
construction of new nuclear power plants; the phase
out of the use of nuclear power world wide; and a
moratorium on the construction of large hydro schemes.

3. Climate Justice affirms the rights of indigenous peoples
and affected communities to represent and speak for
themselves.

11. Climate Justice calls for clean, renewable, locally
controlled and low-impact energy resources in the interest
of a sustainable planet for all living things.

4. Climate Justice affirms that governments are responsible
for addressing climate change in a manner that is
both democratically accountable to their people
and in accordance with the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities.

12. Climate Justice affirms the right of all people, including
the poor, women, rural and indigenous peoples, to have
access to affordable and sustainable energy.

5. Climate Justice demands that communities, particularly
affected communities play a leading role in national and
international processes to address climate change.

13. Climate Justice affirms that any market-based or
technological solution to climate change, such as carbontrading and carbon sequestration, should be subject
to principles of democratic accountability, ecological
sustainability and social justice.

6. Climate Justice opposes the role of transnational
corporations in shaping unsustainable production and
consumption patterns and lifestyles, as well as their role
in unduly influencing national and international decisionmaking.

14. Climate Justice affirms the right of all workers employed in
extractive, fossil fuel and other greenhouse-gas producing
industries to a safe and healthy work environment without
being forced to choose between an unsafe livelihood
based on unsustainable production and unemployment.

7. Climate Justice calls for the recognition of a principle
of ecological debt that industrialized governments and
transnational corporations owe the rest of the world as
a result of their appropriation of the planet's capacity to
absorb greenhouse gases.

15. Climate Justice affirms the need for solutions to climate
change that do not externalize costs to the environment
and communities, and are in line with the principles of a
just transition.

8. Affirming the principle of ecological debt, Climate Justice
demands that fossil fuel and extractive industries be held
strictly liable for all past and current life-cycle impacts
relating to the production of greenhouse gases and
associated local pollutants.

16. Climate Justice is committed to preventing the extinction
of cultures and biodiversity due to climate change and its
associated impacts.

91

17. Climate Justice affirms the need for socio-economic
models that safeguard the fundamental rights to clean air,
land, water, food and healthy ecosystems.
18. Climate Justice affirms the rights of communities
dependent on natural resources for their livelihood and
cultures to own and manage the same in a sustainable
manner, and is opposed to the commodification of nature
and its resources.

23. Climate Justice affirms the right of youth as equal partners
in the movement to address climate change and its
associated impacts.
24. Climate Justice opposes military action, occupation,
repression and exploitation of lands, water, oceans,
peoples and cultures, and other life forms, especially as it
relates to the fossil fuel industry's role in this respect.

19. Climate Justice demands that public policy be based on
mutual respect and justice for all peoples, free from any
form of discrimination or bias.

25. Climate Justice calls for the education of present and
future generations, emphasizes climate, energy, social
and environmental issues, while basing itself on reallife
experiences and an appreciation of diverse cultural
perspectives.

20. Climate Justice recognizes the right to selfdetermination
of Indigenous Peoples, and their right to control their
lands, including sub-surface land, territories and resources
and the right to the protection against any action or
conduct that may result in the destruction or degradation
of their territories and cultural way of life.

26. Climate Justice requires that we, as individuals and
communities, make personal and consumer choices to
consume as little of Mother Earth's resources, conserve
our need for energy; and make the conscious decision to
challenge and reprioritize our lifestyles, re-thinking our
ethics with relation to the environment and the Mother
Earth; while utilizing clean, renewable, lowimpact energy;
and ensuring the health of the natural world for present
and future generations.

21. Climate Justice affirms the right of indigenous peoples and
local communities to participate effectively at every level
of decision-making, including needs assessment, planning,
implementation, enforcement and evaluation, the strict
enforcement of principles of prior informed consent, and
the right to say "No."

27. Climate Justice affirms the rights of unborn generations to
natural resources, a stable climate and a healthy planet.

22. Climate Justice affirms the need for solutions that address
women's rights.

92

10 Principles for Just Climate Policy in US
1. Stop Cooking the Planet Global climate change will
accelerate unless we can slow the release of greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere. To protect vulnerable
Americans, we must find alternatives for those human
activities that cause global climate change.

6. The U.S. Must Lead Countries that contribute the most
to global warming should take the lead in solving the
problem. The U.S. is four percent of the world’s population
but emits 25 percent of the world’s greenhouse gases. All
people should have equal rights to the atmosphere.

2. Protect and Empower Vulnerable Individuals and
Communities Low-income workers, people of color, and
Indigenous Peoples will suffer the most from climate
change’s impact. We need to provide opportunities to
adapt and thrive in a changing world.

7. Stop Exploration for Fossil Fuels Presently known fossil fuel
reserves will last far into the future. Fossil fuel exploration
destroys unique cultures and valuable ecosystems.
Exploration should be halted as it is no longer worth
the cost. We should instead invest in renewable energy
sources.

3. Ensure Just Transition for Workers and Communities No
group should have to shoulder alone the burdens caused
by the transition from a fossil fuel-based economy to
a renewable energy-based economy. A just transition
would create opportunities for displaced workers and
communities to participate in the new economic order
through compensation for job loss, loss of tax base, and
other negative effects.

8. Monitor Domestic and International Carbon Markets We
must ensure that carbon emissions and sinks markets
are transparent and accountable, do not concentrate
pollution in vulnerable communities, and avoid activities
that harm the environment.
9. Caution in the Face of Uncertainty No amount of action
later can make up for lack of action today. Just as we buy
insurance to protect against uncertain danger, we must
take precautionary measures to minimize harm to the
global climate before it occurs.

4. Require Community Participation At all levels and in all
realms, people must have a say in the decisions that affect
their lives. Decisionmakers must include communities in
the policy process. U.S. federal and state governments,
recognizing their government-to-government
relationship, must work with tribes as well.

10. Protect Future Generations The greatest impacts of climate
change will come in the future. We should take into
account the impacts on future generations in deciding
policy today. Our children should have the opportunity for
success through the sustainable use of resources.

5. Global Problems Need Global Solutions The causes and
effects of climate change occur around the world.
Individuals, communities, and nations must work together
cooperatively to stop global climate change.

93

United Nations Declaration of Human Rights
Article 1.
		 All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and
should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
Article 2.
		 Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set
forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind,
such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or
other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made
on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international
status of the country or territory to which a person
belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-selfgoverning or under any other limitation of sovereignty.
Article 3.
		 Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.
Article 4.
		 No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and
the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
Article 5.
		 No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 6.
		 Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a
person before the law.
Article 7.
		 All are equal before the law and are entitled without
any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are
entitled to equal protection against any discrimination in
violation of this Declaration and against any incitement to
such discrimination.
Article 8.
Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the
competent national tribunals for acts violating the
fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by
law.
Article 9.
		 No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile.
Article 10.
		 Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the
determination of his rights and obligations and of any
criminal charge against him.
Article 11.
(1) Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to
be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to

law in a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees
necessary for his defence.
(2) No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on
account of any act or omission which did not constitute a
penal offence, under national or international law, at the
time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty
be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time
the penal offence was committed.
Article 12.
		 No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with
his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to
attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the
right to the protection of the law against such interference
or attacks.
Article 13.
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and
residence within the borders of each state.
(2) Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his
own, and to return to his country.
Article 14.
(1) Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other
countries asylum from persecution.
(2) This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions
genuinely arising from non-political crimes or from acts
contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
Article 15.
		 (1) Everyone has the right to a nationality.
		 (2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality
nor denied the right to change his nationality.
Article 16.
(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to
race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and
to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full
consent of the intending spouses.
(3) The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of
society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State.
Article 17.
(1) Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in
association with others.
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.
Article 18.
		 Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience
and religion; this right includes freedom to change
94

his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in
community with others and in public or private, to
manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice,
worship and observance.
Article 19.
		 Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions
without interference and to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas through any media and regardless
of frontiers.
Article 20.
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly
and association.
(2) No one may be compelled to belong to an association.
Article 21.
(1) Everyone has the right to take part in the government
of his country, directly or through freely chosen
representatives.
(2) Everyone has the right of equal access to public service in
his country.
(3) The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority
of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and
genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal
suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent
free voting procedures.
Article 22.
		 Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social
security and is entitled to realization, through national
effort and international co-operation and in accordance
with the organization and resources of each State, of the
economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his
dignity and the free development of his personality.
Article 23.
(1) Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of
employment, to just and favourable conditions of work
and to protection against unemployment.
(2) Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to
equal pay for equal work.
(3) Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable
remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an
existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if
necessary, by other means of social protection.
(4) Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions
for the protection of his interests.
Article 24.
		 Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including
reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic
holidays with pay.
Article 25.
(1) Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate
for the health and well-being of himself and of his family,
including food, clothing, housing and medical care and
necessary social services, and the right to security in the
event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood,
old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances
beyond his control.

(2) Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care
and assistance. All children, whether born in or out of
wedlock, shall enjoy the same social protection.
Article 26.
(1) Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be
free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages.
Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and
professional education shall be made generally available
and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on
the basis of merit.
(2) Education shall be directed to the full development of the
human personality and to the strengthening of respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among
all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall further the
activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of
peace.
(3) Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education
that shall be given to their children.
Article 27.
(1) Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural
life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in
scientific advancement and its benefits.
(2) Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and
material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or
artistic production of which he is the author.
Article 28.
		 Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in
which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration
can be fully realized.
Article 29.
(1) Everyone has duties to the community in which alone the
free and full development of his personality is possible.
(2) In the exercise of his rights and freedoms, everyone shall
be subject only to such limitations as are determined by
law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition
and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of
meeting the just requirements of morality, public order
and the general welfare in a democratic society.
(3) These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised
contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
Article 30.
		 Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as
implying for any State, group or person any right to
engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the
destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth
herein.

95

Universal Declaration of Rights of Mother Earth
Article 1. Mother Earth
(1) Mother Earth is a living being.
(2) Mother Earth is a unique, indivisible, self-regulating
community of interrelated beings that sustains, contains
and reproduces all beings.
(3)   Each being is defined by its relationships as an integral
part of Mother Earth.
(4) The inherent rights of Mother Earth are inalienable in that
they arise from the same source as existence.
(5) Mother Earth and all beings are entitled to all the inherent
rights recognized in this Declaration without distinction
of any kind, such as may be made between organic and
inorganic beings, species, origin, use to human beings, or
any other status.
(6) Just as human beings have human rights, all other beings
also have rights which are specific to their species or kind
and appropriate for their role and function within the
communities within which they exist.
(7) The rights of each being are limited by the rights of other
beings and any conflict between their rights must be
resolved in a way that maintains the integrity, balance and
health of Mother Earth.
Article 2. Inherent Rights of Mother Earth
(1) Mother Earth and all beings of which she is composed
have the following inherent rights:
			 (a) the right to life and to exist;
			 (b) the right to be respected;
			 (c) the right to regenerate its bio-capacity and to
		 continue its vital cycles and processes free from
		human disruptions;
			 (d) the right to maintain its identity and integrity as a
		 distinct, self-regulating and interrelated being;
			 (e) the right to water as a source of life;
			 (f ) the right to clean air;
			 (g) the right to integral health;
			 (h) the right to be free from contamination, pollution
		 and toxic or radioactive waste;
(i) the right to not have its genetic structure modified
		 or disrupted in a manner that threatens its integrity
		 or vital and healthy functioning;
			 ( j) the right to full and prompt restoration for
		 violation of the rights recognized in this
		 Declaration caused by human activities;
(2) Each being has the right to a place and to play its role in
Mother Earth for her harmonious functioning.
(3)   Every being has the right to wellbeing and to live free
from torture or cruel treatment by human beings.
96

Article 3. Obligations of human beings to Mother Earth
(1) Every human being is responsible for respecting and
living in harmony with Mother Earth.
(2) Human beings, all States, and all public and private
institutions must:
			 (a) act in accordance with the rights and obligations
		 recognized in this Declaration;
			 (b) recognize and promote the full implementation
		 and enforcement of the rights and obligations
		 recognized in this Declaration;
			 (c) promote and participate in learning, analysis,
		 interpretation and communication about how to
		 live in harmony with Mother Earth in accordance
		 with this Declaration;
			 (d) ensure that the pursuit of human wellbeing
		 contributes to the wellbeing of Mother Earth, now
		 and in the future;
(e) establish and apply effective norms and laws for
		 the defence, protection and conservation of the
		 rights of Mother Earth;
			 (f ) respect, protect, conserve and where necessary,
		 restore the integrity, of the vital ecological cycles,
		 processes and balances of Mother Earth;
			 (g) guarantee that the damages caused by human
		 violations of the inherent rights recognized in this
Declaration are rectified and that those responsible
		 are held accountable for restoring the integrity and
		 health of Mother Earth;
			 (h) empower human beings and institutions to defend
		 the rights of Mother Earth and of all beings;
			 (i) establish precautionary and restrictive measures to
		 prevent human activities from causing species
		 extinction, the destruction of ecosystems or the
		 disruption of ecological cycles;
			 ( j) guarantee peace and eliminate nuclear, chemical
		 and biological weapons;
			 (k) promote and support practices of respect for
		 Mother Earth and all beings, in accordance with
		 their own cultures, traditions and customs;
			 (l) promote economic systems that are in harmony
		 with Mother Earth and in accordance with the
		 rights recognized in this Declaration.
Article 4. Definitions
(1) The term “being” includes ecosystems, natural
communities, species and all other natural entities which
exist as part of Mother Earth.
(2) Nothing in this Declaration restricts the recognition of
other inherent rights of all beings or specified beings.

Appendix B
Adapted from

Resources for Organizers

By: Joshua Kahn Russell
https://joshuakahnrussell.wordpress.com/resources-for-activists-and-organizers/
Check out Build The Wheel – new wiki resource for organizers to share curriculum and training tools.
A lot of this curriculum was adapted from, or developed by these outstanding training organizations: the
Ruckus Society, Movement Generation, smartMeme, Training for Change, Beyond the Choir, Midnight Special
Law Collective, Organizing for Power, and School for Unity and Liberation (SOUL)

Activist Tools
Nonviolent Direct Action & Civil Disobedience
Action Strategy & Planning Manual (Ruckus Society)
Overview of Nonviolent Direct Action (Trapeze Collective)
198 Methods of Nonviolent Protest and Persuasion (Gene Sharp)
Story Based Strategies for Action Design (smartMeme)
Shelter Under the Anti-War Umbrella (Solnit)
Scouting Manual (Ruckus)
Creative Direct Action Visuals Manual (Ruckus)
Direct Action Planning Steps (Ruckus)
Balloon Banner Manual (Ruckus)
Bird-Dogging (Ruckus)
Action Planning Manual (Ruckus)
Know Your Rights (Midnight Special Law Collective)
ACLU Guide to Civil Disobedience at Public Universities (ACLU)
Finding Tactics that Matter training tool (Training for Change)

Strategy Tools
Tactics to Strategy intro training agenda (Training for Change)
Three Circles Eco-Justice / Climate Justice Strategy (Movement Generation)
Tactic Star (Beyond The Choir)
Spectrum of Allies (Training for Change)
Spectrum of Allies part 2 (Organizing for Power)
Moving your allies training tool (Training for Change)
Story Based Strategy Campaign Model (smartMeme)
Stages of Movement Development (George Lakey)
Strategizing for a Living Revolution: 5 Stages for Social Movements (George Lakey)
The Eight Stages of Successful Social Movements (Bill Moyer)
97

Narrative Power Analysis (Beautiful Trouble)
Battle of the Story Worksheet (smartMeme)
Defining Strategy tool: Blanket Game (Training for Change)
Influence Map Worksheet (smartMeme)
Points of Intervention Worksheet (smartMeme)
Goal Setting tool: paper plate challenge (Training for Change)
Building a Successful Antiwar Movement (Beyond the Choir)
TFC Strategy Game (Training for Change)
Macro-Strategy Tug-of-war (Training for Change)
From Dictatorship to Democracy: A Conceptual Framework for Liberation (Gene Sharp – used by Tahrir Square
organizers in Egypt)

Facilitation
56 Games, Warm-Ups, and Energizers (Levana Saxon & Joshua Kahn Russell)
Tips for Good Facilitators (Results Through Training)
Flip Chart Chart: Graphic Facilitation Techniques (Christine Valenca & Helen Spector)
Hints for Facilitators (Casagordita)
Taking Stock of Taking Stack (Training for Change)
How To Make Meetings Work in a Culturally Diverse Group (Lee Gardenswartz & Anita Rowe)
GAMES, WARM UPS, AND ENERGIZERS (Levana Saxon and Joshua Kahn Russell)
Sample Facilitation Training curriculum (Lisa Fithian)
Meeting Facilitation: the No-Magic Method (Berit Lakey)

Organizing
Jemez Principles for Democratic Organizing
Understanding The Role of an Organizer training tool (SOUL)
How to Organize a Demonstration
Tornado Warning: 4 roles of social change agents training tool (Training for Change)
Thoughts and Exercises on Power (Lisa Fithian)
Organizer Training: fear and power [oriented toward Unions] (Lisa Fithian)
Organizational Self-Assessment training tool (SOUL)
198 Methods of Nonviolent Protest and Persuasion (Gene Sharp)
How to Pass a Local Resolution

Media
Media Manual (Ruckus)
Spokesperson Tips (smartMeme)
Values Based Messaging tool (Wellstone Action)
Why Stories Matter (Marshall Ganz)
Sample Op-Ed (Opinion piece) (RAN)
Frank Luntz’s Playbook (a right-wing guide to media and messaging instructing Republicans on how to create a
values-shift to the Right (Frank Luntz)

Outreach
Tips for plugging people in (Beyond the Choir & War Resisters League)
Class Rap (EAC)
Phonebanking (EAC)
Tabling (EAC)
98

Full Toolkits
Youth Organizing for Community Power / Movement Building (SOUL)
Re:Imagining Change: How to Use Story-based Strategy to Win Campaigns, Build Movements, and Change the World
(HIGHLY RECOMMENDED!) (smartMeme)
Progressive Communicators Network Toolbox (PCN)
Get Some Action: Taking our place in the history of US social movements (Joshua Kahn Russell w/ Gopal Dayanenni,
Sharon Lungo, Madeline Gardner)
Training for Trainers [order form for hard copy](SOUL)
Diversity and Anti-Oppression training tools (Training for Change)
Indigenous Peoples’ Guide, False Solutions to Climate Change (Indigenous Environmental Network)
Rainforest Action Network Corporate Campaigning Activist Manual (RAN)

Recursos en español
Iconoclasistas (Sitio completo de herramientas de la activista, desde Argentina)

Resources on Privilege, Power,
Race, Class, and Gender
Whiteness, Organizing, and Allies
White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack (Peggy Mcintosh)

Building a Racially Diverse and Anti-Oppressive Movement
A Note on Guilt
Jemez Principles for Democratic Organizing
Student Environmentalists Learn Hard Lessons (SEAC)
15 Tools for Creating Healthy, Productive Interracial/Multicultural Communities
The Soul of Environmentalism

Environmental Justice & Climate Justice
Interview with Robert Bullard (Great Environmental Justice Primer)
Eco-Justice People’s Movement Assembly Resolution (U.S. Social Forum)
Climate Justice Now! North America Manifesto (Climate Justice Now! North America)
Principles of Environmental Justice (.pdf)
10 Principles for Just Climate Change Policies in the US
Bali Principles of Climate Justice
Climate Justice Fact Sheet (Corpwatch)
We Speak for Ourselves: Indigenous peoples challenge the fossil fuel regime in Alberta (Dominion)
A Climate of Change: African Americans, Global Warming and a Just Climate Policy for the US (EJCC)

Class
Opening Pandora’s Box: Adding Classism to the Agenda
Wanna Talk Values? (Class and Race intersections and classism among African Americans)

99

More…
Internalized Oppression and Disability

Recommended Readings
A Call to Innovation! (smartMeme)
Strategizing for a Living Revolution: 5 Stages for Social Movements (George Lakey)
Capitalism vs The Climate (Naomi Klein, “The Nation”)
The Power of Nonviolent Direct Action – Daniel Hunter (final) (Daniel Hunter)
Decolonizing the Revolutionary Imagination (Patrick Reinsboro)
Out of the Spiritual Closet: Organizers Transforming the Practice of Social Justice (Movement Strategy Center)
Eco-Justice People’s Movement Assembly Resolution (U.S. Social Forum)
Climate Justice Now! North America Manifesto (Climate Justice Now! North America)
Frank Luntz’s Playbook (a right-wing guide to media and messaging instructing Republicans on how to create a
values-shift to the Right (Frank Luntz)
The Gulf Oil Spill: A Hole in the World (Naomi Klein)
The Soul of Environmentalism: Rediscovering Transformational Politics in the 21st Century (Michel Gelobter, Michael
Dorsey, Leslie Fields, Tom Goldtooth, Anuja Mendiratta, Richard Moore, Rachel Morello-Frosch, Peggy M. Shepard, and
Gerald Torres)
Environmental Justice Leadership Forum on Climate Change, Principles of Climate Justice (2009)
Interview with Robert Bullard (Great Environmental Justice Primer)
Principles of Environmental Justice
10 Principles for Just Climate Change Policies in the US
Bali Principles of Climate Justice
It’s Too Late to Compromise on Climate (Mateo Nube)
How to Break the Climate Stalemate Between the Global South and the North (Gopal Dayaneni, Mateo Nube)
War, Climate Change and Women (Movement Generation)
The Case for Holistic Economic Transformation (Movement Generation)
Resilient Cities: Building Community Control (Movement Generation)
Carbon Fundamentalism vs. Climate Justice (Gopal Dayaneni)
Mapping the Terrain: Campaign Research March 2009 (Michelle Mascarenhas-Swan)
Climate Justice – A Global View, Colorlines (Gopal Dayaneni)
Principles of Earth Democracy (Vandana Shiva)
What’s Fair? Consumers and Climate Change, Redefining Progress (K. Ansje Miller)
The Right to Ecological Development, Left Turn (Jeff Conant)
This is What Denial Does (George Monbiot)
Who Gains from the Green Economy, Colorlines (Preeti Mangal, Tram Nguyen)
Food, Finance and Climate, Triple Crisis, A Three-Fold Opportunity (Vandana Shiva)
Green Market Hustlers (M.K. Dorsey)
What’s Missing from the Climate Talks? Justice! (Friends of the Earth International)
Indigenous Peoples’ Guide, False Solutions to Climate Change (Indigenous Environmental Network)
The City That Ended Hunger (Frances Moore Lappe, Belo Horizonte)
Policy Link, Healthy Food for All: Building Equitable and Healthy Food Systems in Detroit and Oakland
Who Says You Can’t Change The World, Just Economies and Societies in an Unjust Planet (Beverly Bell and Other
Worlds Collective)
A Call To Innovation (smartMeme)
Rich, Poor and Climate Change (Rachel Oliver, CNN)
The Poor Are Hit the Hardest By Climate Change, But Contribute the Least to it (Seattle PI, Poplock)
The Climate Gap– Poor Minorities Hardest Hit By Climate Change, New American Media (Ngoc Nugyen)
100

The Global Water Crisis (Maude Barlow)
Water Wars, Excerpts from Water Wars Book (Vandana Shiva)
An Indigenous Perspective on Feminism, Militarism and the The Environment (Winona La Duke)
Greenhouse Gangsters vs. Climate Justice, Corpwatch (Kenny Bruno, Joshua Karliner, & China Brotsky)
Anti-Racism for Global Justice reader (Catalyst Project)
Decolonize This! reader (Catalyst Project)
Leadership Development and Collective Liberation reader (Catalyst Project)

101

Appendix C
Effective Climate Communication Resources
The Climate Web – Delivering actionable knowledge on climate change
http://climatographer.com/climate-web/

Seeing Is Believing: A Guide to Visual Storytelling Best Practices
www.resource-media.org/visualstory-lab/report/

The Story Group Climate Change Videos

www.thestorygroup.org/category/nationalclimateassessment/

“How to Tell a Great Story”

www.blogs.hbr.org/2014/07/how-to-tell-a-great-story/

The Psychology of Climate Change Communication:
A Guide for Scientists, Journalists, Educators, Political Aides, and the Interested Public
www.guide.cred.columbia.edu/

EcoAmerica – Building Climate Leadership
http://ecoamerica.org

EcoAmerica - Communicating on Climate: 13 Steps and Guiding Principles
www.ecoamerica.org/research/#comm13steps

EcoAmerica - American Climate Values 2014: Psychographic and Demographic Insights
www.ecoamerica.org/research/#ACV14

Climate Outreach – Europe’s Leading Climate Change Communicators
http://climateoutreach.org/

Climate Outreach - Uncertainty Handbook - 12 practical and easy-to apply principles
for smarter communication about climate change uncertainties
http://climateoutreach.org/resources/uncertainty-handbook/

George Mason Center for Climate Communication
http://www.climatechangecommunication.org/

102

Australian Climate Council

https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/category/communications-tools

Yale Program on Climate Communication
http://climatecommunication.yale.edu/

Yale Climate Connections

http://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/

Climate Communication Science and Outreach
https://www.climatecommunication.org/

Climate Asia Communication Toolkit

http://www.bbc.co.uk/climateasia/resources/communication-toolkit

Climate Communications and Behavior Change: A Guide for Practitioners

http://dnr.wi.gov/topic/SmallBusiness/documents/sustainability/ClimateCommunicationsAndBehaviorChange.pdf

Communicating Climate Change to Mass Public Audiences
http://psych.cf.ac.uk/understandingrisk/docs/cccag.pdf

Climate Access

http://www.climateaccess.org/

Connecting on Climate Change: A Guide to Effective Climate Communication
http://www.connectingonclimate.org/

ICLEI Outreach and Communications Guide

http://www.cakex.org/virtual-library/climate-change-outreach-and-communications-guide

International Workgroup for Indigenous Affairs Training Manual on Advocacy, Lobbying and Negotiating Skills
www.iwgia.org/iwgia_files_publications_files/0642_AIPP_Training_Manual.pdf

Resources for Communication and Public Engagement on Climate Change and Adaptation

https://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/291/docs/pdfs/SGCNWorkshop/PPT5_Moser_2013_Resources_for_Communication_and_
Public_Engagement_on_Adaptation-1.pdf

CARE Climate Change - Advocacy Tools and Guidelines

www.careclimatechange.org/files/toolkit/CARE_Advocacy_Guidelines.pdf

Purdue University Climate Change Toolkit

www.purdue.edu/discoverypark/climate/climate-change/toolkit/manual.pdf
103

Climate Advocacy Lab

http://www.climateadvocacylab.org/

Climate Nexus

http://climatenexus.org/

Climate Shift

http://climateshiftproject.org/

Climate Voices

http://climatevoices.org/

CoClimate

http://www.coclimate.com/

Common Cause

http://valuesandframes.org/

International Environmental Communication Association (IECA)
https://theieca.org/

Media, Communication and Cultural Studies Association Climate Change Network
http://www.meccsa.org.uk/networks/climate-change-network/

Metcalf Institute for Marine and Environmental Reporting Communication on Climate Change Guide
http://metcalfinstitute.org/resources/communicating-on-climate-change/

National Network for Ocean and Climate Change Interpretation (NNOCCI)
http://www.nnocci.org/

European Communication Research and Education Association Science and Environment Communication
http://www.ecrea.eu/divisions/section/id/16/

Susanne Moser Research and Consulting
http://www.susannemoser.com/

Union of Concerned Scientists

http://www.ucsusa.org/action/science_network/

104

Photo Credits
Page

Front Cover MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Activist Collage. 2017. Photograph. Private Collection.
Center Image: Clarkes, Lincoln. Change the World Not the Channel. 1995. Print. Word Works Private Collection.
1995. Used with permission.

Inside Cover Fleetwood, Seth. Kayaktivist vs. Shell Oil. 2015. Photograph. Private Collection.

iii Anderson, Paul K. Delegation of Chiefs from the Washington Tribes and Nations, Standing Rock, N.D. 2016.
Photograph. Private Collection.

iv MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Protest Angels on Paris Bridge. 2015. Photograph. Private Collection.
iv MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Red Banners and Arrows. 2015. Photograph. Private Collection.

1 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Paddle to Paris Event on the Seine. 2015. Photograph. Private Collection.

2 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Break Free PNW March. 2016. Photograph. Private Collection.

3 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Justice Sunflower. 2016. Photograph. Private Collection.

4 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Transition Together. 2016. Photograph. Private Collection.

5 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. I am the Change. 2016. Photograph. Private Collection.
Street Art Image: Climate Justice - Peoples Climate March Photo by Chip Thomas. 2014. Jetsonorama.net.
6 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Galvanize. 2016. Photograph. Private Collection.

7 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Lummi and Sarayaku Dance. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

9 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Rising Tides Rising Rents. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

10 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Mother Daughter Artivists. 2015. Photo. Private Collection

12 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. People’s Climate March Photo A 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

12 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. People’s Climate March Photo B. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.
13 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. In This House. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

14 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Galbraith Mountain Treasured View. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.
15 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Paris Bunker for Change. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
16 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Fossil Free Artivism Hub. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
18 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Ban Fracking Now Rally. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
19 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Painting for Justice. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

20 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Youth March for Climate Justice. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.
22 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Divest for our Future. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

22 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. There is NO Planet B. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

22 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. To Change Everything We Need Everyone. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
22 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Power of the People. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

22 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Justice is Racial Justice. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
22 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Chalk Art for the Climate. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

23 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Strengthening Local Economies. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

24 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Keep it in the Ground. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

25 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Oil, Coal, Gas = Climate Chaos. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.
26 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Warrior Up. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

27 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Ocean Inspiration. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

34 Anderson, Paul K. People’s Climate March Beginning. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

36 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Change Needs You to Change. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.
39 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Justice for All. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.
105

40 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Water is Life. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

41 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Justice Now. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

42 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Justice Tree. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

43 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Stop Talking Start Planting. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

44 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. WWU Divest Western Now. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.
45 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. COP 21 Billboard. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

46 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Happy Rose Message Makers. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
46 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Place to B. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

47 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Stop Climate Crimes. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
50 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Salish Sea Sailing. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

51 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Global March Billboard. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

52 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Protect What You Love. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

54 Beccaria, Daniella. Kayaks. 2015. Seattlepi.com. 16 May, 2015. Web. 20 March, 2017.
http://www.seattlepi.com/local/slideshow/Kayaktivists-protest-Shell-drilling-rig-docked-109893.php
55 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Poster Girl on Swing. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

56 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Youth Choose Climate Justice. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.
57 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Coming Together. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

58 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Quilting for Change. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
59 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. It’s Up to Us. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

64 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Save the Youth. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

66 Anderson, Paul K. Standing Rock Entrance. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.
70 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Campesino Power. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

71 Arthus-Bertrand, Yann. ‘100% Renewable Eiffel Tower Peace Symbol’ - Human Aerial Art by John Quigley/Spectral
Q. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

72 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Green Jobs=A Healthy Planet. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

74 Fairey, Shepard. People’s Climate March. 2014. Web. 21 March, 2017.
https://obeygiant.com/peoples-climate-march-to-change-everything-we-need-everyone/

75 Normandia, Paul. Climate Change Gangsters. 1999. Private Collection. CorpWatch. Transnational Resource and
Action Center. 20 March, 2017.
76 Krug, Kris. System Change Not Climate Change. 17 December, 2009. Web. 20 March, 2017.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/kk/4195801110/
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/legalcode
77 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Knows No Borders. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

78 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Defend the Sacred. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.
78 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Food Justice Now. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.
78 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Resist. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

79 Solomon, Joe. Paris Street Actions. 29 November, 2015. Web. 20 March, 2017.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/23004151@N08/23028833399/in/album-72157661231245780/
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/legalcode

80 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Amy Goodman and Sarayaku Leader. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.
81 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Climate Justice. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

83 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Protect the Sacred. 2014. Photo. Private Collection.

84 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Union Workers. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.
85 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Resist. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

85 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. The Oceans Are Rising. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.
85 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. El Puente. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

86-87 All graphics, photos, and organization logos used with permission.
106

86 McKibben, Bill. The End of Nature. Book Cover. 1989.

86 Normandia, Paul. Climate Change Gangsters. 1999. Private Collection. CorpWatch. Transnational Resource and
Action Center. 20 March, 2017.

86 350.org. Human 350, Almaty, Kazakhstan. 24 October, 2009. Web. 16 May, 2017.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/350org/4038695577/in/album-72157622455212282/
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/legalcode
86 Gofossilfree.org. Logo-Square. Web. 22 March, 2017.
https://gofossilfree.org/logos/

87 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Forward on Climate. 2013. Photo. Private Collection.

87 Kahn Russell, Joshua. Stop the Keystone XL Pipeline. 2012. Web. 16 May, 2017.
https://joshuakahnrussell.wordpress.com/resources-for-activists-and-organizers/
87 Jean, James. Winds of Change. 2014. Painting. Private Collection.

87 Tobocman, Seth. Flood Wall Street. 2014. Print. Private Collection.

87 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Stop Climate Crimes. 2015. Photo. Private Collection.

87 Conatzer, Charles. Shellno.org. 17, April, 2015. Web. 20 March, 2017.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/backbone_campaign/16682605244/in/photolist-uvSyAz-rqbHjU-regJdU-tPw32vuJ3tUy-uLnqba-s6vSih-rTLhWR-sj2kz9-s8Z9Co-s8VDSo-uLo26R-utL3Bu-uLnwmr-s6wKnJ-s8VGxo-smmKVMrdkkKe-EfmS56-skPp9f-vbR6Pq-rTrDaq-redvF5-saXGP4-s8HTww-uLBYN2-v6wh4o-uLLbCi-utMGTq-uLoe2VutMrHL-tPomuE-uKVv1Q-utMSyu-uL48so-utPkiu-tPoU4S-uLn5Wt-seQH5Q-sc5hT4-redepr-sb1LJB-t7hC3srTywWP-uJ3kif-saSjyo-z1Y7oR-wX2uJ3-yYVM9A-xZLE6y
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/legalcode
87 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Break Free. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

87 Democracy Now. 8 September, 2016. Dakota Access Pipeline Company Attacks Native American Protesters with
Dogs & Pepper Spray. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kuZcx2zEo4k
87 Hendrickson, Denise. Washington Monument and Marchers. 2017. Photo. Private Collection.

88 Anderson, Paul K. Chief Phil Lane Jr. Speech. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

88 Anderson, Paul K. Indigenous Smudging Ceremony. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.
89 MacIntyre Witt, Jill. Our Children’s Future. 2016. Photo. Private Collection.

107

End Notes

Acknowledgements

1. The New American Undergound. (2016, September 4). Yakama Tribal Council Chairman JoDe Goudy speaks at Standing
Rock #NoDAPL. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TBeYaX2iphE

What is climate justice?
1. Merriam-Webster, Incorporated. (2017). Justice. In Merriam-Webster. Retrieved from https://www.merriam-webster.com
/dictionary/justice
2. Wikipedia. (2017). Climate justice. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_justice
3. World Wildlife Fund. (2016). Living planet report 2016: Risk and resilience in a new era. Retrieved from http://awsassets
.panda.org/downloads/lpr_living_planet_report_2016.pdf
4. Cafaro, P. (2015). Three ways to think about the sixth mass extinction. Biological Conservation, 192, 387-393. doi:0.1016/j
.biocon.2015.10.017
5. U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit. (2017, January 17) Quinault Indian Nation plans village relocation. Retrieved from
https://toolkit.climate.gov/case-studies/quinault-indian-nation-plans-village-relocation
6. Worldwatch Institute. (2016). Global fossil fuel consumption surges.
Retrieved from http://www.worldwatch.org/global-fossil-fuel-consumption-surges
7. Pan, J., Phillips, J., & Chen, Y. (2008). China’s balance of emissions embodied in trade: Approaches to measurement and
allocating international responsibility. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 24(2), 354-376. doi:10.1093/oxrep/grn016
8. Chenoweth, E. & Stephan, M. J. (2008). Why civil resistance works: The strategic logic of nonviolent conflict. International
security, 33(1), 7-44. doi:10.1162/isec.2008.33.1.7
9. Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of doubt: how a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues from
tobacco smoke to global warming. New York, NY: Bloomsbury Press.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid., 240.
12. Schlosberg, D., & Collins, L. B. (2014). From environmental to climate justice: climate change and the discourse of environmental justice. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 359-374. doi:10.1002/wcc.275
13. Lane, M. (2016). Political theory on climate change. Annual Review of Political Science, 19, 107-123. doi:10.1146
/annurev-polisci-042114-015427
14. Moore, H., & Russell, J. K. (2011). Organizing cools the planet: tools and reflections on across navigating the climate crisis.
Oakland, CA: PM Press, 18.
15. Anderegg, W. R., Prall, J. W., Harold, J., & Schneider, S. H. (2010). Expert credibility in climate change. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107(27), 12107-12109. doi:10.1073/pnas.1003187107
16. National Aeronautics Space Administration. (2016, November 30). Carbon dioxide – direct measurements: 2005-present.
Retrieved from http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide/
17. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2015). The Paris agreement. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int
/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf
18. Ibid.
19. Posner, E. A., & Weisbach, D. (2010). Climate change justice. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
20. Ibid., 60.
108

21. United Nations Environment Programme. (2016). The emissions gap report 2016. Retrieved from
http://web.unep.org/emissionsgap/
22. Posner and Weisbach, Climate change justice.
23. National Aeronautics Space Administration. (2016, November 30). Global temperature – global land-ocean temperature
index. Retrieved from http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-temperature/
24. Buncombe, A. (2009). Rising sea levels inspire Maldives’ underwater cabinet meeting. New Zealand Herald. Retrieved
from http://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=10601743
25. Roser, D., & Seidel, C. (2017). Climate justice: an introduction. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
26. Save Main St. (2016, September 13). Reverend Yearwood speaking at #NoDAPL Rally in DC. [Video file]. Retrieved from
https://www.facebook.com/savemainstnow/videos/1117426678339322/?hc_ref=SEARCH
27. Fragnière, A. (2016). Climate change and individual duties. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(6), 798-814.
doi:10.1002/wcc.422
28. Lane, “Political Theory.”
29. Ibid.
30. Rawls, J. (2009). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid., 5.
33. Caney, S. (2005). Cosmopolitan justice, responsibility, and global climate change. Leiden journal of international law,
18(04), 750. doi:10.1017/S0922156505002992
34. Paterson, M. (2001). Principles of justice in the context of global climate negotiations. In U. Luterbacher, & D.F. Sprinz
(Eds.), International relations and global climate change. (pp.119-26). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
35. Ibid.
36. Roser and Seidel, Climate justice.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.
39. Bulkeley, H., Carmin, J., Broto, V. C., Edwards, G. A., & Fuller, S. (2013). Climate justice and global cities: Mapping the
emerging discourses. Global Environmental Change, 23(5), 914-925. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.05.010
40. Roser and Seidel, Climate justice.
41. Huseby, R. (2013). John Rawls and climate justice. Environmental Ethics, 35(2), 239. doi:10.5840/enviroethics201335219
42. Bulkeley et. al. “Climate justice and global cities.”
43. Bell, D. (2013). How should we think about climate justice? Environmental Ethics, 35(2), 189-208.
doi:10.5840/enviroethics201335217
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid., 192.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid., 195.
48. Ibid.
49. Caney, S. (2016). Climate change and non-ideal theory: six ways of responding to noncompliance. In C. Heyward, & D.
Poser (Eds.), Climate justice in a non-ideal world, (pp.21-42). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
109

50. Moser, S. C., & Dilling, L. (Eds.). (2007). Creating a climate for change: communicating climate change and facilitating social
change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
51. Ibid.
52. Ibid.
53. United Nations. (2017). Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Retrieved from
http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
54. Moore and Russell, Organizing cools the planet, 19.
55. Ibid., 19.
56. International Renewable Energy Agency. (2015). Renewable energy and jobs annual review 2015. Retrieved from
http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_2015.pdf
57. Bullard, R. D., & Lewis, J. (1996). Environmental justice and communities of color. San Francisco, CA: Sierra Club Books.
58. Masozera, M., Bailey, M., & Kerchner, C. (2007). Distribution of impacts of natural disasters across income groups: a case
study of New Orleans. Ecological Economics, 63(2), 299-306. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.06.013
59. Moore and Russell, Organizing cools the planet.
60. Ibid., 21.
61. Mapes, L. V. (2015, December 24). Carbon Washington’s initiative 732 is a go after all. The Seattle Times. Retrieved from
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/environment/carbon-washingtons-initiative-732-is-a-go-after-all/
62. Roberts, D. (2016, November 8). The left vs. a carbon tax. Retrieved from
http://www.vox.com/2016/10/18/13012394/i-732-carbon-tax-washington
63. Westneat, D. (2016, July 12). Audubon backs I-732 to fight climate change – it’s better than nothing. The Seattle Times.
Retrieved from http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/audubon-backs-i-732-its-better-than-nothing/
64. Moore and Russell, Organizing cools the planet, 24.

Social Movement Building
1. National Aeronautics Space Administration. (2017, January 18). NOAA data show 2016 warmest year on record globally.
Retrieved from https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-noaa-data-show-2016-warmest-year-on-record-globally
2. Hall, M. (1995). Poor people’s social movement organizations: The goal is to win. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
3. Ibid., 2.
4. Piven, F.F. & Cloward, R. (1977). Poor people’s movements: Why they succeed, how they fail. New York, NY: Pantheon
Books, 5.
5. Ibid., 5.
6. Ibid., 5.
7. Chenoweth, E. & Stephan, M. (2011). Why civil resistance works: The strategic logic of nonviolent conflict. New York, NY:
Columbia University Press.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid., 30.
10. Engler, M. & Engler, P. (2016). This is an uprising: How nonviolent revolt is shaping the twenty-first century. New York, NY:
Nation Books.
11. Ibid.
12. Chenoweth, E. & Pressman, J. (2017). Crowd Estimates, 1.21.2017. Retrieved from
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1xa0iLqYKz8x9Yc_rfhtmSOJQ2EGgeUVjvV4A8sIaxY/edit#gid=0
110

13. Frostensen, S. (2017, January 31). The Women’s Marches may have been the largest demonstration in US history. Retrieved
from http://www.vox.com/2017/1/22/14350808/womens-marches-largest-demonstration-us-history-map
14. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising, 111.
15. Ibid.
16. Sharp, G. (1973). The politics of nonviolent action – pt. 1. power and struggle. Boston, MA: P. Sargent Publisher, 8.
17. Ibid.
18. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising.
19. Sharp, G. (1973). The politics of nonviolent action – pt. 2. the methods of nonviolent action. Boston, MA: P. Sargent Publisher.
20. Ibid., 118.
21. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid., 32.
25. Alinsky, S. (1971). Rules for radicals: A practical primer for realistic radicals. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
26. Ibid., xxiv.
27. Ibid., xxvi.
28. Ibid., 127-136.
29. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising.
30. Piven, F.F. (2003). Retrospective comments. Perspectives on Politics, 1(4), 707. doi:10.1017/S1537592703000483
31. Piven and Cloward, Poor people’s movements, 24.
32. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising, 45.
33. Piven, “Retrospective comments,” 708.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid.
36. Staples, L. (2016). Roots to power: A manual for grassroots organizing. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, xiii-xviii.
37. Piven and Cloward, Poor people’s movements.
38. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.
43. Ibid.
44. Baker, P & Davenport, C. (2017, January 24). Trump revises Keystone pipeline rejected by Obama. The New York Times.
Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/24/us/politics/keystone-dakota-pipeline-trump.html
45. Finkelstein, N. G. (2012). What Ghandi says: About nonviolence, resistance and courage. New York, NY: OR Books, 51.
46. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising.
111

47. Ibid.
48. Moyer, B. (2001). Doing democracy: The MAP model for organizing social movements. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society
Publishers
49. Engler and Engler, This is an uprising.
50. Moyer, Doing democracy.
51. Ibid.
52. Lakey, G. (n.d.). 4 roles relating to change. Retrieved from http://www.newjimcroworganizing.org/img/pdf/4%20Roles.pdf
53. Russell, J.K. (n.d.). Praxis makes perfect. Retrieved from
https://joshuakahnrussell.wordpress.com/resources-for-activists-and-organizers/

Effective Climate Communication
1. Moser, S. C. (2016). Reflections on climate change communication research and practice in the second decade of the 21st
century: What more is there to say? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(3), 345-369. doi:10.1002/wcc.403
2. Moser, S. C., & Dilling, L. (Eds.). (2007). Creating a climate for change: Communicating climate change and facilitating social
change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
3. Ibid., xiv.
4. Ibid., xiv.
5. Moser, “Reflections on climate change.”
6. Ibid., 347.
7. Endres, D., & DuPont, M. D. (2016). Rhetoric, climate change, and social justice: An interview with Dr. Danielle Endres. Journal of Critical Thought and Praxis, 5(2).
8. Ibid., 4.
9. Ibid., 5.
10. Smith, N., & Leiserowitz, A. (2014). The role of emotion in global warming policy support and opposition. Risk Analysis,
34(5), 937-948. doi:10.1111/risa.12140
11. Stevenson, K., & Peterson, N. (2015). Motivating Action through Fostering Climate Change Hope and Concern and Avoiding Despair among Adolescents. Sustainability, 8(1). doi:10.3390/su8010006
12. Drews, S., & Van den Bergh, J. C. (2016). What explains public support for climate policies? A review of empirical and experimental studies. Climate Policy, 16(7), 855-876. doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1058240
13. Patt, A. G., & Weber, E. U. (2014). Perceptions and communication strategies for the many uncertainties relevant for climate policy. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(2), 219-232. doi:10.1002/wcc.259
14. Masud, M. M., Akhtar, R., Afroz, R., Al-Amin, A. Q., & Kari, F. B. (2015). Pro-environmental behavior and public understanding of climate change. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 20(4), 592. doi:10.1007/s11027-0139509-4
15. Moser, S. C., & Dilling, L. (2011). Communicating climate change: Closing the science-action gap. The oxford handbook of
climate change and society. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 161-174.
16. Moser and Dilling, Creating a climate for change.
17. Roser-Renouf, C., Maibach, E. W., Leiserowitz, A., & Zhao, X. (2014). The genesis of climate change activism: From key
beliefs to political action. Climatic change, 125(2), 163-178. doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1173-5
18. Moore, H., & Russell, J. K. (2011). Organizing cools the planet: Tools and reflections on across navigating the climate crisis.
Oakland, CA: PM Press, 26.
19. Moser, “Reflections on climate change,” 350.
112

20. Moore and Russell, Organizing cools the planet.
21. Patt and Weber, “Perceptions and communication.”
22. Moser. “Reflections on climate change,” 350.
23. Whitmarsh, L. (2009). Behavioural responses to climate change: Asymmetry of intentions and impacts. Journal of environmental psychology, 29(1), 13-23. doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2008.05.003
24. Sussman, R., Gifford, R., & Abrahamse, W. (2016). Social mobilization: How to encourage action on climate change. Victoria, BC: Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions.
25. Patt and Weber, “Perceptions and communication.”
26. Bain, P. G., Milfont, T. L., Kashima, Y., Bilewicz, M., Doron, G., Garðarsdóttir, R. B., ... & Corral-Verdugo, V. (2016). Co-benefits
of addressing climate change can motivate action around the world. Nature climate change, 6(2), 154-157. doi:10.1038
/nclimate2814
27. Fielding, K. S., & Hornsey, M. J. (2016). A social identity analysis of climate change and environmental attitudes and behaviors: Insights and opportunities. Frontiers in psychology, 7. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00121
28. Shi, J., Visschers, V. H., & Siegrist, M. (2015). Public perception of climate change: The importance of knowledge and cultural worldviews. Risk Analysis, 35(12), 2183-2201. doi:10.1111/risa.12406
29. Fielding and Hornsey, “A social identity analysis.”
30. Bain, P. G., Hornsey, M. J., Bongiorno, R., & Jeffries, C. (2012). Promoting pro-environmental action in climate change deniers. Nature Climate Change, 2(8), 602. doi:10.1038/nclimate1532
31. Bullard, D., Robert, D., Gardezi, M., Chennault, C., & Dankbar, H. (2016). Climate Change and Environmental Justice: A
Conversation with Dr. Robert Bullard. Journal of Critical Thought and Praxis, 5(2), 3.
32 Ibid.
33. Endres and DuPont, “Rhetoric, Climate Change, and Social Justice,” 5.
34. Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues from
tobacco smoke to global warming. New York, NY: Bloomsbury Press.
35. Ibid., 214.
36. Cook, J., Oreskes, N., Doran, P. T., Anderegg, W. R., Verheggen, B., Maibach, E. W., ... & Nuccitelli, D. (2016). Consensus on
consensus: A synthesis of consensus estimates on human-caused global warming. Environmental Research Letters, 11(4), 048002.
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002
37. Ibid., 6.
38. Ibid.
39. Moser, “Reflections on climate change,” 348.
40. Ibid.
41. Kahan, Dan M. (2014) Making climate-science communication evidence-based — all the way down. In M. Boykoff & D.
Crow (Eds.). Culture, politics and climate change: How information shapes our common future (pp. 203-220). New York, NY: Routledge Press.
42. Moser, “Reflections on climate change,” 357.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid., 349.
45. Roser-Renouf et al., “The genesis of climate change activism.”
46. Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory of normative conduct: A theoretical refinement and
reevaluation of the role of norms in human behavior. Advances in experimental social psychology, 24, 201.
doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60330-5
113

47. van der Linden, S., Maibach, E., & Leiserowitz, A. (2015). Improving public engagement with climate change five “best
practice” insights from psychological science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(6), 758-763. doi:10.1177/1745691615598516
48. Rees, J. H., & Bamberg, S. (2014). Climate protection needs societal change: Determinants of intention to participate in
collective climate action. European Journal of Social Psychology, 44(5), 466-473. doi:10.1002/ejsp.2032
49. Ibid.
50. Roser-Renouf, C., Atkinson, L., Maibach, E. W., & Leiserowitz, A. (2016). The consumer as climate activist. International
Journal of Communication, 25(10), 4759-4783.
51. Moser and Dilling, Creating a climate for change.
52. Akerlof, K., DeBono, R., Berry, P., Leiserowitz, A., Roser-Renouf, C., Clarke, K. L., ... & Maibach, E. W. (2010). Public perceptions of climate change as a human health risk: Surveys of the United States, Canada and Malta. International journal of environmental research and public health, 7(6), 2559-2606. doi:10.3390/ijerph7062559
53. Akerlof et al., “Public perceptions of climate change,” 2574.
54. Ibid.
55. Lo, A. Y., & Jim, C. Y. (2015). Come rain or shine? Public expectation on local weather change and differential effects on
climate change attitude. Public Understanding of Science, 24(8), 928-942. doi:10.1177/0963662513517483
56. Moser and Dilling, “Communicating climate change.”
57. Ibid.
58. Ibid., 355.
59. Roser-Renouf et al., “The consumer as climate activist.”
60. Moser and Dilling, “Communicating climate change.”
61. Ibid., 459.
62. Ibid., 11.
63. Semenza, J. C., Hall, D. E., Wilson, D. J., Bontempo, B. D., Sailor, D. J., & George, L. A. (2008). Public perception of climate change: Voluntary mitigation and barriers to behavior change. American journal of preventive medicine, 35(5), 479-487.
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.020
64. Whitmarsh, L., O’Neill, S., & Lorenzoni, I. (2013). Public engagement with climate change: What do we know and where
do we go from here? International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics, 9(1), 7-25. doi:10.1386/macp.9.1.7_1
65. Moser and Dilling, “Communicating climate change.”
66. Wahlström, M., Wennerhag, M., & Rootes, C. (2013). Framing “The Climate Issue”: Patterns of Participation and Prognostic
Frames among Climate Summit Protesters. Global Environmental Politics, 13(4), 101-122. doi:10.1162/GLEP_a_00200
67. Ibid.

Climate Activist Survey
1. Semenza, J. C., Hall, D. E., Wilson, D. J., Bontempo, B. D., Sailor, D. J., & George, L. A. (2008). Public perception of climate
change: voluntary mitigation and barriers to behavior change. American journal of preventive medicine, 35(5), 479-487.
2. Whitmarsh, L., O’Neill, S., & Lorenzoni, I. (2013). Public engagement with climate change: What do we know and where do
we go from here? International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics, 9(1), 7-25.

Climate Justice Movement Building
1. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2014). UNFCCC -- 20 years of effort and achievement key milestones in the evolution of international climate policy. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/timeline/
2. Ibid.
114

3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. Frankel, J. (2005). Climate and trade: Links between the Kyoto Protocol and WTO. Environment Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 47(7), 8-19. Doi:10.3200/ENVT.47.7.8-21.
6. Levi, M., & Murphy, G. H. (2006). Coalitions of contention: The case of the WTO protests in Seattle. Political Studies, 54(4),
651-670. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9248.2006.00629.x
7. Russell, B. T. (2012). Interrogating the post-political: The case of radical climate and climate justice movements (Doctoral
dissertation). University of Leeds.
8. Della Porta, D., & Tarrow, S. G. (2005). Transnational protest and global activism. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Russell, “Interrogating the post-political.”
12. Bruno, K., Karliner, J., & Brotsky, C. (1999). Greenhouse gangsters vs. climate justice. San Francisco, CA: CorpWatch.
13. CorpWatch. (n.d.). About CorpWatch. Retrieved from http://www.corpwatch.org/article.php?id=11314
14. Ibid.
15. Climate Action Network-International. (2015). Climate Action Network-International annual report. Retrieved from
http://www.cannetwork.org/files/CAN%20annual%20report%202015.pdf
16. Indigenous Environmental Network. (2017). About. Retrieved from http://www.ienearth.org/about/
17. La Via Campesina. (2009, February 11). The international peasant’s voice. Retrieved from
https://www.viacampesina.org/en/index.php/organisation-mainmenu-44
18. Russell, “Interrogating the post-political.”
19. Ibid.
20. Ibid., 159.
21. Ibid., 176.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Building Bridges Collective (2010). Space for movement: Reflections from Bolivia on climate justice, social movements and
the state. Leeds, UK: Leeds University Press, 27.
26. Ibid., 52.
27. Russell, “Interrogating the post-political,” 166.
28. Russell, “Interrogating the post-political,” 167.
29. Tokar, B. (2014b). Organization profile – 350.org. In M.Dietz & H. Garrelts (Eds.), Routledge handbook of the climate change
movement (pp. 252-254). New York, NY: Routledge.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid.
33. Ibid.
115

34. Fossil Free. (n.d.). Divestment commitments. Retrieved from https://gofossilfree.org/commitments/
35. Visser, N. (2014, September, 22). Hundreds of thousands turn out for the People’s Climate March in New York City. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/21/peoples-climate-march_n_5857902.html
36. Giacomini, T., & Turner, T. (2015). The 2014 People’s Climate March and Flood Wall Street civil disobedience:
Making the transition to a post-fossil capitalist, commoning civilization. Capitalism Nature Socialism, 26(2), 36. doi:
10.1080/10455752.2014.1002804
37. Ibid., 36.
38. Bond, P. (2014). Climate justice gets a new lease on life. Retrieved from:
http://climateandcapitalism.com/2014/09/25/climate-justice-gets-new-lease-life/
39. Giacomini and Turner, The 2014 People’s Climate March, 36.
40. Tokar, Organization profile – 350.org.
41. Plant for the Planet. (2017) Aims and vision. Retrieved from https://www.plant-for-the-planet.org/en/about-us
/aims-and-vision
42. Burkett, M. (2016). Climate disobedience. Duke Environmental Law & Policy Forum, 27(1), 1-179.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid., 16
46. Phipps, C., Vaughan, A., & Milman, O. (2015, November 29). Global climate march 2015: hundreds of thousands march
around the world – as it happened. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2015/nov/29
/global-peoples-climate-change-march-2015-day-of-action-live
47. Dawson, A. (2010). Climate justice: The emerging movement against green capitalism. South Atlantic Quarterly, 109(2),
317. doi:10.1215/00382876-2009-036
48. Breakfree2016. (2016). May 2016 break free from fossil fuels. Retrieved from https://breakfree2016.org/
49. Burkett, “Climate disobedience.”
50. CCTV Center for Media and Democracy. (2017, January 14). Amy Goodman & Bill McKibben at Chandler Center for the
Arts in Randolph, Vermont 1/14/17. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IS4r1I6KkHA
51. Burkett, “Climate disobedience,” 36.
52. Priest, S. (2016). Ingredients of a Successful Climate Movement, Communicating climate change: The path forward, 137.
London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
53. Burkett, “Climate disobedience,” 36.
54. Ibid., 36.
55. Ibid., 36.
56. Ibid.
57. Ibid., 44.
58. People’s Climate Movement, (2017). We resist. We build. We rise. Retrieved from https://peoplesclimate.org/
59. Burkett, “Climate disobedience.”
60. Ibid., 49.
61. Russell, “Interrogating the post-political.”
62. Ibid.
63. Ibid.
116

64. Moore, H., & Russell, J. K. (2011). Organizing cools the planet: tools and reflections on across navigating the climate crisis.
Oakland, CA: PM Press, 48.
65. Tokar, B. (2014a). Movements for climate justice in the worldwide. In M.Dietz & H. Garrelts (Eds.), Routledge handbook of
the climate change movement (pp. 131-146). New York, NY: Routledge.
66. Ibid.
67. Ibid., 143.
68. The Climate Reality Project. (2017). Climate Reality Leadership Corps. Retrieved from
https://www.climaterealityproject.org/leadership-corps
69. Stoss, F. (2017, March 16). Personal communication.
70. Roser, D., & Seidel, C. (2017). Climate justice: An introduction. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
71. Kaswan, A. (2016). Climate adaptation and theories of justice. Archiv für Rechts-und Sozialphilosophie. University of San
Francisco Law Research Paper No. 2016-01. Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2689813
72. Tokar, Movements for climate justice, 143.
73. Ibid., 143.
74. Priest, “Ingredients of a Successful Climate Movement,” 155.
75. Vinthagen, S. (2013). Ten theses on why we need a “social science panel on climate change”. ACME: An international
e-journal for critical geographies, 12(1), 155-176.
76. Ibid.
77. Ibid., 174.
78. Ibid.
79. People’s Climate Movement.
80. Roser and Seidel, Climate justice, 218.
81. Clayton, S., & Myers, G. (2015). Conservation psychology: Understanding and promoting human care for nature. Chichester,
UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
82. Ibid.
83. Roser and Seidel, Climate justice, 220-221.
84. Tokar, Movements for climate justice, 143.
85. Klein, N. (2014). This changes everything: Capitalism vs. the climate. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, Inc, 459.
86. Ibid., 461.
87. Ibid.
88. Bond, P. (2012). Politics of climate justice: Paralysis above, movement below. Scottsville, South Africa: University of Kwa Zulu
Natal Press.

Conclusion
1. Lane, Phil Jr. (2000). Developing the Wisdom of the Heart. In J. Gardner (Ed.), Architects of peace: Visions of hope in words
and images (p. 46). Novato, CA: New World Library.

117

References

What is climate justice?

Anderegg, W. R., Prall, J. W., Harold, J., & Schneider, S. H. (2010). Expert credibility in climate change. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(27), 12107-12109. doi:10.1073/pnas.1003187107
Bell, D. (2013). How should we think about climate justice? Environmental Ethics, 35(2), 189-208. doi:10.5840/enviroethics201335217
Bulkeley, H., Carmin, J., Broto, V. C., Edwards, G. A., & Fuller, S. (2013). Climate justice and global cities: Mapping the emerging
discourses. Global Environmental Change, 23(5), 914-925. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.05.010
Bullard, R. D., & Lewis, J. (1996). Environmental justice and communities of color. San Francisco, CA: Sierra Club Books.
Buncombe, A. (2009). Rising sea levels inspire Maldives’ underwater cabinet meeting. New Zealand Herald. Retrieved from http://
www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=10601743
Cafaro, P. (2015). Three ways to think about the sixth mass extinction. Biological Conservation, 192, 387-393. doi:0.1016/j.biocon.2015.10.017
Caney, S. (2005). Cosmopolitan justice, responsibility, and global climate change. Leiden journal of international law, 18(04), 747775. doi:10.1017/S0922156505002992
Caney, S. (2016). Climate change and non-ideal theory: six ways of responding to noncompliance. In C. Heyward, & D. Poser
(Eds.), Climate justice in a non-ideal world, (pp.21-42). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chenoweth, E. & Stephan, M. J. (2008). Why civil resistance works: The strategic logic of nonviolent conflict. International security,
33(1), 7-44. doi:10.1162/isec.2008.33.1.7
Fragnière, A. (2016). Climate change and individual duties. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(6), 798-814.
doi:10.1002/wcc.422
Huseby, R. (2013). John Rawls and climate justice. Environmental Ethics, 35(2), 227-243. doi:10.5840/enviroethics201335219
International Renewable Energy Agency. (2015). Renewable energy and jobs annual review 2015. Retrieved from http://www.irena.
org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_2015.pdf
Lane, M. (2016). Political theory on climate change. Annual Review of Political Science, 19, 107-123. doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-042114-015427
Mapes, L. V. (2015, December 24). Carbon Washington’s initiative 732 is a go after all. The Seattle Times. Retrieved from http://
www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/environment/carbon-washingtons-initiative-732-is-a-go-after-all/
Masozera, M., Bailey, M., & Kerchner, C. (2007). Distribution of impacts of natural disasters across income groups: A case study of
New Orleans. Ecological Economics, 63(2), 299-306. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.06.013
Merriam-Webster. (2017). Justice. In Merriam-Webster. Retrieved from https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/justice
Moore, H., & Russell, J. K. (2011). Organizing cools the planet: Tools and reflections on across navigating the climate crisis. Oakland,
CA: PM Press.
Moser, S. C., & Dilling, L. (Eds.). (2007). Creating a climate for change: Communicating climate change and facilitating social
change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
National Aeronautics Space Administration. (2016, November 30). Carbon dioxide – direct measurements: 2005-present. Retrieved
from http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide/
National Aeronautics Space Administration. (2016, November 30). Global temperature – global land-ocean temperature index.
Retrieved from http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-temperature/

118

Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues from tobacco
smoke to global warming. New York, NY: Bloomsbury Press.
Pan, J., Phillips, J., & Chen, Y. (2008). China’s balance of emissions embodied in trade: Approaches to measurement and allocating
international responsibility. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 24(2), 354-376. doi:10.1093/oxrep/grn016
Paterson, M. (2001). Principles of justice in the context of global climate negotiations. In U. Luterbacher, & D.F. Sprinz (Eds.), International relations and global climate change. (pp.119-26). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Posner, E. A., & Weisbach, D. (2010). Climate change justice. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rawls, J. (2009). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Roberts, D. (2016, November 8) The left vs. a carbon tax. Retrieved from http://www.vox.com/2016/10/18/13012394/i-732-carbontax-washington
Roser, D., & Seidel, C. (2017). Climate justice: An introduction. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Save Main St. (2016, September 13). Reverend Yearwood speaking at #NoDAPL Rally in DC. [Video file]. Retrieved from https://
www.facebook.com/savemainstnow/videos/1117426678339322/?hc_ref=SEARCH
Schlosberg, D., & Collins, L. B. (2014). From environmental to climate justice: Climate change and the discourse of environmental
justice. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 359-374. doi:10.1002/wcc.275
United Nations Environment Programme. (2016). The emissions gap report 2016. Retrieved from http://web.unep.org/emissionsgap/
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2015). The Paris agreement. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf
United Nations. (2017). Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit. (2017, January 17) Quinault Indian Nation plans village relocation. Retrieved from https://toolkit.
climate.gov/case-studies/quinault-indian-nation-plans-village-relocation
Westneat, D. (2016, July 12). Audubon backs I-732 to fight climate change – it’s better than nothing. The Seattle Times. Retrieved
from http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/audubon-backs-i-732-its-better-than-nothing/
Wikipedia. (2017). Climate justice. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_justice
Worldwatch Institute. (2016). Global fossil fuel consumption surges. Retrieved from http://www.worldwatch.org/global-fossil-fuel-consumption-surges
World Wildlife Fund. (2016). Living planet report 2016: Risk and resilience in a new era. Retrieved from http://awsassets.panda.org/
downloads/lpr_living_planet_report_2016.pdf

Social Movement Building
Alinsky, S. (1971). Rules for radicals: A practical primer for realistic radicals. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Baker, P & Davenport, C. (2017, January 24). Trump revises Keystone pipeline rejected by Obama. The New York Times. Retrieved
from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/24/us/politics/keystone-dakota-pipeline-trump.html
Chenoweth, E. & Pressman, J. (2017). Crowd estimates, 1.21.2017. Retrieved from https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d
/1xa0iLqYKz8x9Yc_rfhtmSOJQ2EGgeUVjvV4A8sIaxY/edit#gid=0
Chenoweth, E. & Stephan, M. (2011). Why civil resistance works: The strategic logic of nonviolent conflict. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press.
Engler, M. & Engler, P. (2016) This is an uprising; How nonviolent revolt is shaping the twenty-first century. New York, NY: Nation
Books.
Finkelstein, N. G. (2012). What Ghandi says: About nonviolence, resistance and courage. New York, NY: OR Books.
119

Frostensen, S. (2017, January 31). The Women’s Marches may have been the largest demonstration in US history. Retrieved from
http://www.vox.com/2017/1/22/14350808/womens-marches-largest-demonstration-us-history-map
Hall, M. (1995). Poor people’s social movement organizations: The goal is to win. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Lakey, G. (n.d.). 4 roles relating to change. Retrieved from http://www.newjimcroworganizing.org/img/pdf/4%20Roles.pdf
Moyer, B. (2001) Doing democracy: The MAP model for organizing social movements. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers
National Aeronautics Space Administration. (2017, January 18). NOAA data show 2016 warmestyear on record globally. Retrieved
from https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-noaa-data-show-2016-warmest-year-on-record-globally
Piven, F.F. (2003). Retrospective comments. Perspectives on Politics, 1(4), 707–710.doi:10.1017/S1537592703000483
Piven, F.F. & Cloward, R. (1977). Poor people’s movements: Why they succeed, how they fail. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Russell, J.K. (n.d.). Praxis makes perfect. Retrieved from https://joshuakahnrussell.wordpress.com/resources-for-activists-and
-organizers/
Sharp, G. (1973). The politics of nonviolent action – pt. 1. power and struggle. Boston, MA: P. Sargent Publisher.
Sharp, G. (1973). The politics of nonviolent action – pt. 2. the methods of nonviolent action. Boston, MA: P. Sargent Publisher.
Staples, L. (2016). Roots to power: A manual for grassroots organizing. Santa Barbara, CA: ABCCLIO.

Effective Climate Communication
Akerlof, K., DeBono, R., Berry, P., Leiserowitz, A., Roser-Renouf, C., Clarke, K. L., ... & Maibach, E. W. (2010). Public perceptions of
climate change as a human health risk: Surveys of the United States, Canada and Malta. International journal of environmental research and public health, 7(6), 2559-2606. doi:10.3390/ijerph7062559
Bain, P. G., Hornsey, M. J., Bongiorno, R., & Jeffries, C. (2012). Promoting pro-environmental action in climate change deniers. Nature Climate Change, 2(8), 600-603.doi:10.1038/nclimate1532
Bain, P. G., Milfont, T. L., Kashima, Y., Bilewicz, M., Doron, G., Garðarsdóttir, R. B., ... & Corral Verdugo, V. (2016). Co-benefits of
addressing climate change can motivate action around the world. Nature climate change, 6(2), 154-157. doi:10.1038/nclimate2814
Bullard, D., Robert, D., Gardezi, M., Chennault, C., & Dankbar, H. (2016). Climate Change and Environmental Justice: A Conversation with Dr. Robert Bullard. Journal of Critical Thought and Praxis, 5(2), 3.
Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory of normative conduct: A theoretical refinement and reevaluation
of the role of norms in human behavior. Advances in experimental social psychology, 24, 201-234.
doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60330-5
Cook, J., Oreskes, N., Doran, P. T., Anderegg, W. R., Verheggen, B., Maibach, E. W., ... & Nuccitelli, D. (2016). Consensus on consensus: A synthesis of consensus estimates on human-caused global warming. Environmental Research Letters, 11(4), 048002.
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002
Drews, S., & Van den Bergh, J. C. (2016). What explains public support for climate policies? A review of empirical and experimental
studies. Climate Policy, 16(7), 855-876. doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1058240
Endres, D., & DuPont, M. D. (2016). Rhetoric, climate change, and social justice: An interview with Dr. Danielle Endres. Journal of
Critical Thought and Praxis, 5(2), 1-6.
Fielding, K. S., & Hornsey, M. J. (2016). A social identity analysis of climate change and environmental attitudes and behaviors:
Insights and opportunities. Frontiers in psychology, 7. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00121
Kahan, Dan M. (2014) Making climate-science communication evidence-based — all the way down. In M. Boykoff & D. Crow
(Eds.). Culture, politics and climate change: How information shapes our common future (pp. 203-220). New York, NY: Routledge Press.
Lo, A. Y., & Jim, C. Y. (2015). Come rain or shine? Public expectation on local weather change and differential effects on climate
change attitude. Public Understanding of Science, 24(8), 928-942. doi:10.1177/0963662513517483
120

Masud, M. M., Akhtar, R., Afroz, R., Al-Amin, A. Q., & Kari, F. B. (2015). Pro-environmental behavior and public understanding of
climate change. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 20(4), 591-600. doi:10.1007/s11027-013-9509-4
Moore, H., & Russell, J. K. (2011). Organizing cools the planet: Tools and reflections on across navigating the climate crisis. Oakland,
CA: PM Press.
Moser, S. C., & Dilling, L. (Eds.). (2007). Creating a climate for change: Communicating climate change and facilitating social
change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moser, S. C., & Dilling, L. (2011). Communicating climate change: Closing the science-action gap. The oxford handbook of climate
change and society. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 161-174.
Moser, S. C. (2016). Reflections on climate change communication research and practice in the second decade of the 21st century:
What more is there to say? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(3), 345-369. doi:10.1002/wcc.403
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2011). Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues from tobacco
smoke to global warming. New York, NY: Bloomsbury Press.
Patt, A. G., & Weber, E. U. (2014). Perceptions and communication strategies for the many uncertainties relevant for climate policy.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(2), 219-232. doi:10.1002/wcc.259
Rees, J. H., & Bamberg, S. (2014). Climate protection needs societal change: Determinants of intention to participate in collective
climate action. European Journal of Social Psychology, 44(5), 466-473. doi:10.1002/ejsp.2032
Roser-Renouf, C., Maibach, E. W., Leiserowitz, A., & Zhao, X. (2014). The genesis of climatechange activism: From key beliefs to
political action. Climatic change, 125(2), 163-178. doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1173-5
Roser-Renouf, C., Atkinson, L., Maibach, E. W., & Leiserowitz, A. (2016). The consumer as climate activist. International Journal of
Communication, 25(10), 4759-4783.
Semenza, J. C., Hall, D. E., Wilson, D. J., Bontempo, B. D., Sailor, D. J., & George, L. A. (2008). Public perception of climate change:
Voluntary mitigation and barriers to behavior change. American journal of preventive medicine, 35(5), 479-487.
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.020
Shi, J., Visschers, V. H., & Siegrist, M. (2015). Public perception of climate change: The importance of knowledge and cultural worldviews. Risk Analysis, 35(12), 2183-2201.doi:10.1111/risa.12406
Smith, N., & Leiserowitz, A. (2014). The role of emotion in global warming policy support and opposition. Risk Analysis, 34(5), 937948. doi:10.1111/risa.12140
Stevenson, K., & Peterson, N. (2015). Motivating Action through Fostering Climate Change Hope and Concern and Avoiding Despair among Adolescents. Sustainability, 8(1), 6. doi:10.3390/su8010006
Sussman, R., Gifford, R., & Abrahamse, W. (2016). Social mobilization: How to encourage action on climate change.
van der Linden, S., Maibach, E., & Leiserowitz, A. (2015). Improving public engagement with climate change five “best practice”
insights from psychological science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(6), 758-763. doi:10.1177/1745691615598516
Wahlström, M., Wennerhag, M., & Rootes, C. (2013). Framing “The Climate Issue”: Patterns of Participation and Prognostic Frames
among Climate Summit Protesters. Global Environmental Politics, 13(4), 101-122. doi:10.1162/GLEP_a_00200
Whitmarsh, L. (2009). Behavioural responses to climate change: Asymmetry of intentions and impacts. Journal of environmental
psychology, 29(1), 13-23. doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2008.05.003
Whitmarsh, L., O’Neill, S., & Lorenzoni, I. (2013). Public engagement with climate change:  What do we know and where do we go
from here? International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics, 9(1), 7-25. doi:10.1386/macp.9.1.7_1

Climate Activist Survey
Semenza, J. C., Hall, D. E., Wilson, D. J., Bontempo, B. D., Sailor, D. J., & George, L. A. (2008). Public perception of climate change:
voluntary mitigation and barriers to behavior change. American journal of preventive medicine, 35(5), 479-487.
Whitmarsh, L., O’Neill, S., & Lorenzoni, I. (2013). Public engagement with climate change: What do we know and where do we go
from here? International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics, 9(1), 7-25.
121

Climate Justice Movement Building
Bond, P. (2012). Politics of climate justice: Paralysis above, movement below. Scottsville, South Africa: University of Kwa Zulu Natal
Press.
Bond, P. (2014). Climate justice gets a new lease on life. Retrieved from: http://climateandcapitalism.com/2014/09/25/climate-justice-gets-new-lease-life/
Bruno, K., Karliner, J., & Brotsky, C. (1999). Greenhouse gangsters vs. climate justice. San Francisco, CA: CorpWatch.
Building Bridges Collective (2010). Space for movement: Reflections from Bolivia on climate justice, social movements and the state.
Leeds, UK: Leeds University Press.
Breakfree2016. (2016). May 2016 break free from fossil fuels. Retrieved from https://breakfree2016.org/
Burkett, M. (2016). Climate disobedience. Duke Environmental Law & Policy Forum, 27(1), 1-179.
CCTV Center for Media and Democracy. (2017, January 14). Amy Goodman & Bill McKibben at Chandler Center for the Arts in
Randolph, Vermont 1/14/17. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IS4r1I6KkHA
Clayton, S., & Myers, G. (2015). Conservation psychology: Understanding and promoting human care for nature. Chichester, UK:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Climate Action Network-International. (2015). Climate Action Network-International annual report. Retrieved from
http://www.cannetwork.org/files/CAN%20annual%20report%202015.pdf
CorpWatch. (n.d.). About CorpWatch. Retrieved from http://www.corpwatch.org/article.php?id=11314
Dawson, A. (2010). Climate justice: The emerging movement against green capitalism. South Atlantic Quarterly, 109(2), 313-338.
doi:10.1215/00382876-2009-036
Della Porta, D., & Tarrow, S. G. (2005). Transnational protest and global activism. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Fossil Free. (n.d.). Divestment commitments. Retrieved from https://gofossilfree.org/commitments/
Frankel, J. (2005). Climate and trade: Links between the Kyoto Protocol and WTO. Environment Science and Policy for Sustainable
Development, 47(7), 8-19. Doi:10.3200/ENVT.47.7.8-21.
Giacomini, T., & Turner, T. (2015). The 2014 People’s Climate March and Flood Wall Street civil disobedience: Making the transition to a post-fossil capitalist, commoning civilization. Capitalism Nature Socialism, 26(2), 27-45. doi:
10.1080/10455752.2014.1002804
Indigenous Environmental Network. (2017). About. Retrieved from http://www.ienearth.org/about/
Kaswan, A. (2016). Climate adaptation and theories of justice. Archiv für Rechts-und Sozialphilosophie. University of San Francisco
Law Research Paper No. 2016-01. Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2689813
Klein, N. (2014). This changes everything: Capitalism vs. the climate. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, Inc.
La Via Campesina. (2009, February 11). The international peasant’s voice. Retrieved from https://www.viacampesina.org/en
/index.php/organisation-mainmenu-44
Levi, M., & Murphy, G. H. (2006). Coalitions of contention: The case of the WTO protests in Seattle. Political Studies, 54(4), 651-670.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9248.2006.00629.x
Moore, H., & Russell, J. K. (2011). Organizing cools the planet: Tools and reflections on across navigating the climate crisis. Oakland,
CA: PM Press.
People’s Climate Movement. (2017). We resist. We build. We rise. Retrieved from https://peoplesclimate.org/
Phipps, C., Vaughan, A., & Milman, O. (2015, November 29). Global climate march 2015: Hundreds of thousands march around the
world – as it happened. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2015/nov/29/global-peoples-climate
-change-march-2015-day-of-action-live

122

Plant for the Planet. (2017) Aims and vision. Retrieved from https://www.plant-for-the-planet.org/en/about-us/aims-and-vision
Priest, S. (2016). Ingredients of a Successful Climate Movement, Communicating climate change: The path forward (pp. 137-159).
London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Roser, D., & Seidel, C. (2017). Climate justice: An introduction. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Russell, B. T. (2012). Interrogating the post-political: The case of radical climate and climate justice movements (Doctoral dissertation). University of Leeds.
Stoss, F. (2017, March 16). Personal communication.
The Climate Reality Project. (2017). Climate Reality Leadership Corps. Retrieved from https://www.climaterealityproject.org
/leadership-corps
Tokar, B. (2014a). Movements for climate justice in the worldwide. In M.Dietz & H. Garrelts (Eds.), Routledge handbook of the climate change movement (pp. 131-146). New York, NY: Routledge.
Tokar, B. (2014b). Organization profile – 350.org. In M.Dietz & H. Garrelts (Eds.), Routledge handbook of the climate change movement (pp. 252-254). New York, NY: Routledge.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2014). UNFCCC -- 20 years of effort and achievement key milestones
in the evolution of international climate policy. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/timeline/
Vinthagen, S. (2013). Ten theses on why we need a “social science panel on climate change”. ACME: An international e-journal for
critical geographies, 12(1), 155-176.
Visser, N. (2014, September, 22). Hundreds of thousands turn out for the People’s Climate March in New York City. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/21/peoples-climate-march_n_5857902.html

123

Notes

124

This is a masters project for Masters of Arts, Environmental Studies
Huxley College of the Environment
Western Washington University
516 High Street

Bellingham, WA 98225

All content is available online: www.climatejusticenow.earth

